
1
ON THE NATURE OF REALITY
Albert Einstein in Conversation with
Rabindranath Tagore
Rabindranath Tagore visited Einstein’s house in Caputh, near
Berlin, on July 14, 1930. The discussion between the two great
men was recorded, and was subsequently published in the
January, 1931 issue of Modern Review.
TAGORE: You have been busy, hunting down with mathemat-
ics, the two ancient entities, time and space, while I have been
lecturing in this country on the eternal world of man, the uni-
verse of reality.
EINSTEIN: Do you believe in the divine isolated from the world?
TAGORE: Not isolated. The infinite personality of man com-
prehends the universe. There cannot be anything that cannot
be subsumed by the human personality, and this proves that the
truth of the universe is human truth.
EINSTEIN: There are two different conceptions about the na-
ture of the universe — the world as a unity dependent on human-
ity, and the world as reality independent of the human factor.
TAGORE: When our universe is in harmony with man, the eter-
nal, we know it as truth, we feel it as beauty.
EINSTEIN: This is a purely human conception of the universe.
TAGORE: The world is a human world — the scientific view
of it is also that of the scientific man. Therefore, the world
1
apart from us does not exist; it is a relative world, depending
for its reality upon our consciousness. There is some standard
of reason and enjoyment which gives it truth, the standard of
the eternal man whose experiences are made possible through
our experiences.
EINSTEIN: This is a realization of the human entity.
TAGORE: Yes, one eternal entity. We have to realize it through
our emotions and activities. We realize the supreme man, who
has no individual limitations, through our limitations.
Science is concerned with that which is not confined to individu-
als; it is the impersonal human world of truths. Religion realizes
these truths and links them up with our deeper needs. Our indi-
vidual consciousness of truth gains universal significance. Reli-
gion applies values to truth, and we know truth as good through
own harmony with it.
EINSTEIN: Truth, then, or beauty, is not independent of man?
TAGORE: No, I do not say so.
EINSTEIN: If there were no human beings any more, the Apollo
Belvedere no longer would be beautiful?
TAGORE: No!
EINSTEIN: I agree with this conception of beauty, but not with
regard to truth.
TAGORE: Why not? Truth is realized through men.
EINSTEIN: I cannot prove my conception is right, but that is
my religion.
TAGORE: Beauty is in the ideal of perfect harmony, which is
in the universal being; truth is the perfect comprehension of
the universal mind. We individuals approach it through our
