
Oh, hello, friends, welcome to the show, this episode, the podcast is brought to you by CBD MD. This is an easy one for me. I use their products every day. I just use their Rickover cream right before this podcast tweaked my knee a little bit and I rubbed it in it.


Make it feel better. CBD Recover is fantastic.


It's my favorite CBD muscle balm.


I guess you would call it muscle lotion. It combines CBD with inflammation fighting compounds like Arnica and vitamin B6 to give you the support you need where it matters most sore muscles when everything is kind of achy.


Right. I love it. It's great for reducing inflammation. Just makes you feel good post workout soreness. It's fantastic for it. I love their drops, the the oil, the CBD tinctures. I take that stuff every day. And one of the other products I love is our CBD freeze with menthol. It's an award winning product. I don't know who's giving out awards for CBD, but it's all some shit and it comes in a roll on which I really love.


I love the roll on because you can kind of digging into muscles and massage yourself with the roll on so you get a little bit of massage from a little bit of relief from the massage.


But also you get relief from the CBD freeze. They just make great stuff, just awesome super high quality CBD. And to make it even easier for you to add this CBD to your fitness routine, fitness or lifestyle, I love that term.


My lifestyle, they're offering all Jarry listeners twenty five percent off your next purchase when you use the code Rogan at checkout. So once again, that CBD, MD Dotcom promo code, Rogan at checkout and save twenty five percent off on your purchase of their superior CBD products. CBD, MD Dotcom Promo Code Rogan save some cash on some awesome shit. We're also brought to you by a blue apron. Blue apron makes it super easy for you to cook delicious meals at home and they do this by providing you with a cooler.


It comes filled with ingredients all properly proportioned with step by step photographic instructions that allow you like easily just follow the directions you can cook amazing meals and Blue Apron is kicking off summer with a can't miss menu of their top rated recipes all through June. Yes, the entire menu are recipes that customers repeatedly asked to bring back the ones they rate the highest, the ones they say they'd cook every week. So if you're looking to try a meal kit service, this is the perfect time for you to see why people love Blue Apron.


Blue Apron is just it's an awesome company and they're flexible. You could schedule, skip or cancel orders anytime you want. If you're traveling, you can send your box to your destination or to a friend by updating your delivery address. Any time and any night you get to cook and spend quality time enjoying great meals and night well spent and blue apron's premium recipes. Take it a step further and give you a truly unique experience. And now they're available on both the signature for two and a signature for four menus.


And it's like bringing a restaurant home. Even if there's no occasion. It's an affordable, more personal way for you to make any meal feel special. And you can learn something.


When you cook in a blue apron with their premium recipes, you not only enjoy a truly restaurant worthy meal, but you also end up discovering a new ingredient or a new method or a unique food pairing that you would never try without it.


And it's also a company that's concerned about the environment. You can feel good about your food and your environmental impact because Blue Apron is the first meal kit to partner with how to recycle who takes the guesswork out of recycling and is committed to transparency and reducing waste. Over eighty five percent of blue apron's packaging is recyclable and forty one percent of their packaging materials are made from recycled content into the first meal kit company to transition to drain safe, fully recyclable icepacks.


So feel good about your choices and create delicious meals at home with blue apron. Don't sacrifice on flavor. Don't settle for boring meals with blue apron. You can enjoy top rated recipes all month long. Check out this week's menu and get thirty dollars off across your first two deliveries when you visit Blue Apron Dotcom Rogan that's blue apron dotcom slash Rogan Blue Apron Feed your soul.


That's very dramatic isn't it. But it's also an awesome company so let it go.


We're also brought to you by Flavor, Flavor and their friends that whistle pig whisky.


I'm a big fan of the whisky folks. I like it. I like it. It's a great social lubricant. We drink it a lot on this podcast because it stimulates conversations and makes people lose.


And we recently joined Flavia's, a club for fine spirits enthusiasts, and the folks at Flava are absolutely obsessed with finding the next great spirit, be it whiskey, rum, mescal, cognac or whatever spirit you're into. And they want to take you on that journey of discovery. And one of my favorite parts of this discovery is the access to exclusive and highly allocated bottles that you get with flavor that you won't find anywhere else. So if you like good quality liquor, you should join now or treat someone else with this amazing club membership.


And if I just described your dad, give him a membership for Father's Day.


Yeah, he'll always have something good to drink and you'll be able to share those experiences with him, you know, quality family time with quality drinks. So to celebrate father figures, Flavor has created a special promo for Jarry listeners together with Whistle Pig Whiskey. Whistle Pig is an awesome whiskey company, a maverick amongst whiskey makers and the creator of the most awarded rye whiskey. There are small craft operation that's doing some really experimental things with rye, like finishing aged whiskey and rare casks from pretty much every continent in the world.


And usually American whiskey is not aged for more than a few years. But Whistle Pig goes the extra mile, aging whiskey up to eighteen years the hot. My favorite is their six year old whistle pig piggyback ride. It's the last expression made by their original master distiller. So get your dad a membership to flavor this Father's Day. He's going to love it and he's got to get a fat bottle, a piggyback ride. So visit Flavor Dotcom Slash Rogen and use the special E offer to surprise your dad with a bottle of whistle pig piggyback ride.


I'm telling you, it's going to be fucking tough for the other people to top that gift. Head to Flávia. That's a V.A. flavor dotcom slash Rogen and use the J r e offer and were also brought to you by four stigmatic creators of delicious and nutritious lion's mane coffee.


They have a bunch of cool products that are mushroom based coffee and Lion's Mane is my favorite. I have this stuff that I keep on my desk. It's right here. This is a lion's mane, mushroom elixir, misk mix. It tastes good, comes in these little packets. I rip it open and poured into a bottle of water and shake it up. And it's good for the dome folks. Great for the brain.


And their coffee is more than just coffee. It's coffee that also contains the organic lion's mane, which is my favorite functional mushroom. It's your brain's best friend. And it also includes wild harvested Chagga, the king of mushrooms. Choco is great for supporting your immune system and mushroom coffee's very easy to digest. And you don't get a spike in a crash. It is about fifty percent less caffeine than regular coffee, but it's actually good for you. And it doesn't taste like mushrooms.


It has zero sugar, zero carb, zero calories, plus it's organic, fair trade, vegan and kitto. And every single batch is third party lab tested for heavy metals allergens, bad bacteria, yeast, molds, mycotoxins and pesticides before they get to your hands. So, you know, you're getting the highest quality shrooms possible. It's awesome stuff. And they have a 100 percent money back guarantee one. Yes, 100 percent love every sip or you get your money back and they got you a sweet deal for stigmatic.


He's going to hook up Jarry listeners with their best selling lines. Main coffee just for Jarry listeners, you can't get this on their website, receive up to 40 percent off on their lion's mane coffee bundles and declaim this deal you must go to for stigmatic dotcom Rogan. This offers only for Jarry listeners. It's not available on the regular website. Go to EFO. You are zygomatic for stigmatic dotcom slash Rogen and get yourself some awesome and delicious and nutritious lion's mane.


Coffee full discount applied at checkout.


Da da da. We did it folks.


My guest today is a hilarious stand up comedian. He has been on the TV show Silicon Valley. He is on the new Netflix show, Space Force. He was in crazy rich Asians and he's got an awesome new standup comedy special that's out right now on Amazon Prime.


Please give it up for the great and powerful Jimmy Owyang government podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience trying by job, podcast by night all day.


Hey, what's up, brother Jesse? It's great seeing this great seeing a fellow comedian that I don't think I've been inside a comedy club or seen any comedian for two months now. It's weird.


It's like they're trying to get it out of our system. Like they're trying to look like if we're junkies, if we're comedy junkies, we've gone to a rehab. You have to live like a regular person.


It's must have. I mean, I've gotten past a phase of like because back in the day, if I didn't do stand up for a week, I'll get depressed because there's nothing else going on in my life.


But now I got other stuff going I can do writing, whatever, but I feel bad for like the road guys.


Oh yeah. And the open micas. That's just coming up. Oh yeah. And I'm sure you've gotten this. Are a lot of people inviting you to do virtual virtual stand up comedy shows on Zoome.


Yeah, they can each. It did. That is the worst idea on the fucking planet bro.


Even great comics look terrible on those and they can record you. Exactly. Exactly.


And record you looking terrible. Bombing just it's just not the right place. It's like let's play basketball underwater. Yeah.


That doesn't work, but that shows you how desperate people are.


They would put their whole material on the line to do virtual no real people audience just to get the rocks off.


Dave Chappelle's got a very unique solution. He's doing some shit in his backyard. He sent me well, not his backyard. His friend has a wedding pavilion, so he set up this thing at a wedding pavilion. All of it is covid safe. Look at that. That's Dave on stage in Ohio at a wedding pavilion.


Oh, wow, dude. That's where people will get married.


And Dave's up there doing stand up. Yeah, well, he's so good. He doesn't need like a low ceiling, you know, pack seats.


He just needs a crowd. And, you know, he also, I think. He's just he's he just figured out how to improvise, he's like, there's going to be a way to get around this. I'm going crazy.


Yeah, there's got to be a way and doing it outside, separating everybody. Following all the covid requirements. The governor actually had approved this. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah.


He's in Ohio. So the governor of Ohio approved all this. Why did this happen like recently? Just doing he just started doing it.


He texted me a couple days ago saying it was going to take like four days to work things out. We're making history over here, Joe Rogan, and.


Yeah. And then, you know, next thing you know, he's off and running this.


I mean, comedy clubs probably got to be the last thing to open up right now. Not the last thing I think, like Staples Center, shit like that arenas big places. That's going to be the last thing. Restaurants are slowly starting to. There it is. Boom. What is this Brooklyn vegan you?


Yeah, it's a very reputable it's just like, boy, is that fraught with peril.


People that are really into being from Brooklyn and people that are really into telling you they're vegan together at last.


Speaking of improvisation, I'm always very jealous because I think my buddy Ben Schwartz and Thomas Middleditch, they did improvising show on Netflix.


Right. And that is like the ultimate hack to people like us that take like my first special took me ten years and now these guys can crank out five in a day because it's improvised. I'm like, what are we doing here?


Well, I remember the first time I saw you is at the Improv. I saw you kill in that little tiny room of death. That lab is death. Everybody eats shit in that lab. That is the worst ever since they remodeled this lab. Half the room is a bar. Yes.


And then there's pillars in the front of the stage. And right next to you is where the door is. So people are coming in the door. There's all this chit chat, talking and buying tickets. It's right there. But you were killing. And I was like, damn, this dude's legit. Funny because you have to be funny to kill in that bizarre involves, you know, like shit in that room. I seen a lot of people eat shit in that room.


It's a tough room. And sometimes you want to start in that small room and then do another set in a big room. So you go home happy. I did the wrong way.


That's the worst feeling room that I came to. The little room was like ten people in there and eight shit. Yeah. And then you first said you're completely forgotten and then you're just like, well, I'm a piece of shit and I do stand up. Not only that, I strolled in cocky because I just killed them like I know how to kill a fucking professional here.


I went up in there and bombed.


Yeah, it's a it's just a terrible setup. They know it, though.


They've remodeled that improv more than any other fucking club I've ever even heard of. Why the whole setup was fine. They don't listen.


They just they just say, I got an idea. And then everybody goes, OK, great. So, like, they put a new green room that you have to duck to get into. Have you seen that new green room? It's upstairs that no one's ever going to use ever. Yeah. And then you go down the stairs from that new green room and it takes you right to where the stages wait the the one with the piano and stuff.


Well, that's the other green room. OK, no, I haven't seen the other fucking green rooms. Huh.


It's the dumbest setup of all time. The main room is a great room, no great room. It's like it's one of the all time classic rooms. They haven't fucked that up.


I still think the improv in L.A., it's my favorite place. It's a great place. Yeah. And they show me love, like early on. You know, it's really like page. It's been great. Read a page and Rita are awesome.


They're the salt of the earth, both those people. It's a nice environment. It just was weird that you had to kind of wait in the hallway before you go on stage.


And so you kind of got molested by weirdos would come out and ask questions and shit while you're trying to get your brother, what sometimes as a single guy, that's actually that might be the good move down.


You know, I mean, Laugh Factory idea set. You get the fuck out, right? You don't get to meet nobody. You know, improv.


Ed, you said you hang out at the bar and I know some girls come talk to you like, you know, you have to swim through some weirdos.


You do have time to weirdos. It's fine. And some dudes will just wedge themselves between you and a girl, too, right? If you're trying to chit chat with a lady, they go, Hey, Jimmy.


Hi, Jimmy. You were really funny. I got to talk to you about something. I'm I'm starting a virtual comedy club, and I'd love to have you be a part of it.


There's been a lot of pitches that I inadvertently said yes to because I was half drunk at the bar.


It's like, hey, man, let me tell you about the show in Silverlake. It's kind of near Echo Park, but really it's in Boyle Heights. But great open mic, man. You know, Jamie Kennedy, he's done it.


You got to do it. I was like, sure, why don't you send me an email and the next email I get I completely forgot about the interaction email I get.


He's like, So I got you on the show. Mayford team man. So you good. You're going to do fifteen. And I'm like, well, I'm out of town.


Well, I can't say that because I'm like, did I did I agree to this because I don't remember.


I was drunk. So I was like, sure, I'll come and I get suckered into these terrible things.


Yeah. You got to know how to say no. It's very important. Yeah, very important.


Well, that's the thing about like the open mic community, there's always some dudes got some kind of a bringer show that they're putting something together. And it's always it's usually it's OK, it's good seasoning, you get on stage, do a little set, you know, at any stage of the game, it's always good to get on stage and weird crowds. Yeah, but the problem with a lot of those shows is you'll go on after, like two or three people that are deaf.


There is no comedy left in life and you'll be convinced that nothing is funny. It's impossible to be funny. Yeah. You know, I'm saying, like, you see someone really, really, really bad and it's like there's nothing to comedy on.


Comedy doesn't work because there's so many, I guess, approach to this. Right. Like, I think there's one that's like, you know, you don't want to follow someone that's too strong. Like if I go on stage after Chappelle kind of fucked, you know, he's both strong and super famous.


Yeah, it's a double hammer. Yeah. Like people believe in, you know, the store or whatever. But also there's the other side of it.


It's you want to ride a wave. Yeah.


If something that's doing well, you want to go in there and ride that wave. But then the opposite of it is if somebody is bad you can go on, you can kill it and then the crowd believes in you. But if somebody is too terrible, then it's dead.


Like you have to spend your first five minutes just doing crowd was one of the signs of a terrible headliner is when they bring really bad openers just to look really good.


Yes. They don't want anybody stealing their thunder. So they're being like just complete scrubs.


That fucks me up, don't you know? Me too.


I for me, my opener is more about energy. I want some of these energy that matches my level.


But it's funny or somebody that's kind of lower energy but really smart and good, because if you have somebody that goes super big, that that's kind of hard for me to do.


An hour of that same energy.


Not the worst is the guy before he does music. Oh, no. You know that. So they they start doing songs. They have songs for shit. Oh my God. I never cared about an opening song.


You know, D.J., when you go on the road is like, hey, what song you come up to? I'm like, whatever, just play some top 40. Hip hop doesn't matter. Right. But then one of my openers has a very specific trick daddy song. I got shout out to my boy Derek Keehner. Hilarious guy, right.


He has a very energetic trick daddy song and that bit kills and it's kind of dirty and it's cool and I'm like, shit, I got to step my game up because if my opener is going up, what a killer song and I walk up the stage with nothing. Yeah. You know, it just doesn't seem right.


In the early 2000s and the late 90s, early 2000s, a lot of guys would have funny raps and they would close with a rap like a rap parody, a hilarious rap. So things rhyme, they're loud, there's a lot of gesturing and they're like, thank you, good night.


And then you'd have to go up. So talk to my mom today.


It's I remember I used to do a bunch of like urban clubs and Jay Spot and remember Jay Spots and then a funny name, Urban Urban.


Well I can see clubs, should I say Black Club or I guess it's a black club. Urban maybe more offensive. I don't know. But they call themselves Urban Club.


Isn't that weird. That is weird. Why urban. It's a code word for black, right.


It's a good code because it also means a city like all clubs are in cities.


When the fuck was you ever done a club in the woods? Right. Well, those aren't rural.


It's like the word urban at inner city for some reason. Right. Isn't that kind of the same thing?


But I mean, like there's urban clubs in L.A. that are just downtown. Oh, right. Is not that one. What does that one club. Garrett Morris is clawed back in the day. No, there's a club downtown that's a block club.


It's supposed to be real good. I don't remember, but I just thought the term urban is just very weird.


I remember.


So when I hit the jackpot, I don't know if it's still there. The jackpot, it's opened by Jay Anthony Brown.


I was pretty, very green, you know, and I was on top of Yoshinari it, but it's pop club, right?


And remember, Jay, come up to me on my set was like 15 minutes.


He was like, you got any music? Cuz I was like, no, just play whatever he's like. Are you sure.


I was like yeah, no I don't have any music. He was like, you don't want me to play anything in your set.


I was like, no, why would you do that. And then I realized I watch all the other comics. Everybody had like five music skits and the crowd loved it and they were killing it. And then I went I was just trying to do my observational humor and just a shit, you know, because it's just everybody is doing that.


You're not like you're at a complete disadvantage. Yeah.


There's a famous story about Mitch Hedberg. Mitch Hedberg was on the road in Ohio and he was doing this club. And for whatever reason, the manager of the club decided to book this guy who was like super high energy. And he had music. And I think he did like acrobatics on stage and shit like crazy stuff. And, yeah, got everybody riled up.


And then Mitch would go on there and everything was like and he was bombing and they wanted to switch Mitch with him and pay him less money.


And it was like this big fucking deal. It's like, no, man, you fucked up. It's not like Mitch isn't great.


You run a comedy club, you know who Mitch Hedberg is. You know he's great.


Yeah. Why are you having a guy who does back flips to fucking bass beats before him? You can't do that.


You ever do the comedy Magic Club? Sure. One of my favorite clubs, you know, they have ten comedians on there, but sometimes you got to follow a magician or a juggler.


Yes.


You know, I stopped doing that there. I said, listen, we had a bunch of issues there. One issues they would not. Let me bring up Joey Diaz.


Oh, why? Because he's not klinz too dirty. But I'm dirty, too. But I'm like, whatever. For whatever reason, I can get away with it for him. So I love the guy to death.


Mike is the best, but he wouldn't let Joey go up because I love but he's just not my crowd. Is just this your crowd people, the humans, they come to see me. Trust me, it is a different crowd.


And I do kind of like it because if you just run your set at the Improv or the factory or whatever.


Right. And then you take on the road, sometimes it doesn't translate. But the the comedy magic crowd is like almost like a Midwest white crowd, which is sort of urban.


Yes. What is to be a code word for a white crowd suburb like suburban crowd.


They're like gated beach community crowd. Yeah. The one percenter crowd older to go like Jay Leno fans. Yeah. Yeah.


Cause Jay Leno used to work out his Tonight Show set every Sunday night there. That was his thing.


He used to go there and he had all his monologue shit and would work it out at the comedy Magic on Sunday night.


Yeah, there definitely. I mean, it really helped me because Richard and Mike gave me a lot of stage time coming up.


And they're great folks. They're really nice. And the club is ran.


So they actually care about the comics. Like usually, you know, you do the problem. There's no knock to the improv, but you got to sign a W nine and give you five bucks in cash.


That's just the way it is. The Improv. Right. And then you go to County Magic Club.


It's, I think, fifty dollars a set, which is very nice for like a quick Yeah. For like a quick set.


But then if you do it on Valentine's Day they don't tell you, hey, we're going to pay you whatever. They just come down, do Valentine's Day because we like it, but they sell these Valentine's Day packages. And then at the end of the day, I think I open up. It was like a thousand dollars.


They just gave all of us a thousand dollar checks. It was like really, really nice for a comic that really needs the food.


There is really good real filet mignon in comedy club. Yeah. Like a real restaurant that you would go to.


You'd go there as a restaurant. Yeah.


Yeah. That was a great spot.


But it is I don't know why I it's too I tell my stories like my Asian stories or whatever, but like you can tell, like people come up to me like hey man, I was funny but like, you know, like when they talk to themselves they like.


Yeah. That, that Asian that oriental boy kind of funny. Like, you know, you know, there's some kind of that going on. Like I am so foreign to them. They found it refreshing that I can't believe that Oriental boy spoke English style kind of get that vibe over there.


You know, isn't it funny that Oriental became like taboo, like the term Oriental?


It's it's a weird one. And people that say Oriental did never mean harm. No. You know, just old.


They always the old like it's my buddy's fathers in high school.


Yeah. They're like. Right. So you and your Oriental parents.


You guys. Like, they're trying to be so pissy, it's like when people call black people African-Americans because they are too careful, you know, and that's kind of weird, you know, right? Yeah, I don't love it.


It's just I mean, Woody.


Well, Jamaicans are like someone who comes from Jamaica and lives. And I guess technically you'd be an African-American because Africans went to Jamaica first. Right. And then to America.


It's odd.


Yeah, it's all weird, man. It's all but just like for Asian folks, like also people get upset if you can't make the distinction.


Yes. Asians have a lot of beef amongst each other.


Joe Boy has a great bit about that.


There's a hierarchy for sure. What's the top of the food chain?


What put him in a spot here? But I think, look, this is I think generally it's you have your main like Korean, Chinese, Japanese. And then they sometimes look down at the Southeast Asians.


So whatever Filipino, Thai, whatever Vietnamese probably.


But then if you call a Chinese person Japanese to get pissed. But if you call Japanese, I don't know the exact thing, but it could get ugly.


It could. And I mean, it's not just country to country. It could be like my Parents Day from Shanghai, you know, which is a very metropolitan like Manhattan of China.


So they have an elitist syndrome to them. And they look down at people from the South China or whatever. And then I grew up in Hong Kong, which was a British colony. Right. And it's a very different government.


We're a little more, I guess, progressive or whatever. Just a different city state.


So Hong Kong people has elitist syndrome towards mainland Chinese people, like my my dad came from Shanghai to Hong Kong, so he spoke Cantonese, which is to local Hong Kong dialect with Mandarin like a mainland guy accent.


And they will always make fun of them as like the mainland guy.


Oh yeah. How does how does it like when you're seeing what's going on with Hong Kong right now where they're losing their autonomy to China, is that freak you out crazy?


Well, yeah, it's very disheartening, but I think my dad saw that coming.


Yeah. You know, we moved here when I was thirteen the year 2000.


That was three years after the British gave Hong Kong back to China after one hundred year treaty.


Yeah, I guess they're like nice colonizers.


They're like, we're going to colonize you. But just just a hundred years and here you can have it back.


It seems like it's going downhill. The riots in the streets or excuse me, the protest, because they're extremely polite protests. It's the way they part the street for an ambulance is amazing. It's tough.


And I think that's one of the main reasons, aside from education and all that, just more opportunities in America.


That was probably one of the main reasons why my family wanted to move out of Hong Kong, you know, to America.


They saw it coming because my dad grew up fifties, sixties, communist revolution. Motherfuckers would kick down your door and take everything. Both of my grandparents went to jail from both sides because they were intellectuals.


I believe my my father's father, my grandfather was like a chemistry teacher and he was considerate intellectually.


He went to jail.


So they put him in jail just because he was an intellectual? I believe so.


I don't know the exact story. But then I know uncles so were like talking shit that also went to jail. A lot of people went to jail.


So when they went to jail because they were complaining. I think it's a mixture of things.


Yeah. You just they just fucking throw you in jail and they kick down your door and take your shit. Look, OK, now, now I said that I can never do a movie in China anymore.


I'm sure I'm banned because you just said, yeah, but who knows.


But it's I, I get look, I don't ever try to get political my stand up or whatever, but I get mad when I see Hipster's in their house having Chairman Mao posters. I like wearing Chairman Mao T-shirts and shit.


Chairman Mao killed a lot of people. Man, that's like on the other side of the spectrum, you have a like a fucking Hitler poster in your house. But somehow that's cool. Right? Right, right.


You know, like it wasn't because all I know I don't know history that well, but I know the stories that my parents told me during the communist revolution, how they got fucked over.


There's something about Mao that's like it's intriguing for people that just look at it on the surface. Right.


Like, same thing with Che Guevara. Like, he looks cool, right? Cool. Looking like a revolutionary. Oh, yeah. Murderer. Yeah. Murderer. Genocidal murderer. Tiananmen Square. Yeah. Right.


No, that was that was after all I think that was still.


Yeah. Communist dictatorship. And it's a it's in a weird place now. Right. Because it's capitalist but it's capitalist really run by this communist government like the communist government and the businesses are completely intertwined. It's. It's interesting because they can make policies to have less red tape because they can make policies faster, because the government, whatever they say, just goes, yeah, but then I guess you hope that it's a decent person in control.


That's the fear that people have here in the United States of competing with China, is that China has these advantages because their businesses are so their corporations are so intertwined with the government that we might do the same thing here. Mm hmm. I mean, it's just it's a weird sort of slippery slope as sort of as laws. And all your different rights get eroded.


You get closer and closer to the government being in control of things like these new laws that they've passed recently where the government can just look into your Internet searching with no warrant whatsoever. This was something that I don't know if you know about this part of the Patriot Act, that this was one of the things that was people were furious that Senator Sanders because Bernie Sanders didn't he wasn't there. He didn't show up for the vote. And if he had shown up and voted the other way, it wouldn't have passed.


Why didn't he show up? He won't comment. Oh, he won't. He's been reached out for to comment on it. He won't comment on it. But it's very disheartening. And a lot of people who are progressives are furious at him and they feel very, very betrayed by this because now no one even knows. Like you didn't know, right? Most people don't know. Well, the government can now look at all your dirty little searches.


I don't care about that. Like, but but I should. It's a slippery slope, right? Is that the fear? Well, here's a fear.


The government is just people. You know, I don't want any I don't I don't think like I should be able to just go looking at Jamie's search, like just for whatever reason Jamie's at home.


What if I have some code I can go. Just look what it was Jamie looking at.


What is it? What are you searching for? That's that's creepy, right? It's creepy. Like, privacy is privacy. It's important. You should you should be able to reveal what you want to reveal. And if the government, which is just a bunch of people, can peer into your life but you can't peer into their life. Yeah, sets up abuse. It's the same. It's like it's power. It's the same thing you see with cops.


Right. All this shit you see with cops, for sure, racism is involved. But you know what else is involved? Power. When you see that that old man get thrown to the ground, the one that Trump said is faking it, that bashed his head, bleeding out of his fucking head.


And Trump's like very good actor. But, yeah, I mean, that's what Trump said. He said it seemed to have fallen too easily, but, yeah, he's fucking dead. He's an old man. Oh, God.


The fact that he said that that is this might be Tifa. Like what?


All of these conspiracy theories out there as an actor, I must say, if any of these people are conspiracy guys, they are they are fucking Daniel Day Lewis, like they are great actors, like, you know, like certain times.


I even said like dumb YouTube videos of there's a funny YouTube video of somebody's girlfriend deleting his two KNBR account and he just destroyed. You could tell it took everything for him, like not to like hit her or like whatever. Right. He just he was just destroyed.


He was crying. And it's so my buddy's like, oh, I don't know, man, that's fake, dude.


I was like, yo, that guy that guy is a fucking Emmy Award Oscar winning actor. That shit is fake. That is not easy to do.


No, people think everything is fake. Yeah. I think so many things are fake. So many people have sent me things.


So you think this is fake and like, oh Jesus Christ. Yeah, yeah.


Some things are fake. That old man falling the way he did and bouncing his head off the fucking concrete in the middle of a huge protest.


Yeah, that was real, dude. Yeah, that's real. That's what happens when you push an old man.


That's just the fact that this is the president of the United States say that. Okay, bro, you would fall that way, too.


He's a minor trained actor and he has a blood PAC in the back of his head.


Like, how can that pro wrestler like, oh, yeah, he fell onto a mat that was cut themselves with razors for years. So.


So that wound bleeds is I don't think you can hear the guy's head bounce off the ground. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's a thunk.


There's a hollow coconut like thunk when someone's head bounces off concrete. Yeah, it's fucking terrible.


But the fact that the president of United States didn't just think that, but he thought it would be a good idea to tweet that like he's fallen apart, all this protest, he's fallen apart.


And also the fact that they denied that they use tear gas to clear out that square so that he can go to the church like, hey, man, there's video, there's video of tear gas, you know, oh, you want to call?


It's pepper gas. OK, you know what? That pepper gas they're using, you're not allowed to use that war. Yeah, you know that. Oh, really? Yeah. You're not allowed to use that shit in war. You can't use tear gas and it violates the Geneva Convention.


It's like a bio bio Google that makes sure I'm right about that. But I'm pretty sure I'm right. I'm pretty sure the argument that they're making is you can't use tear gas and war, but you should be able to use it in protests. And these cops are shooting rubber bullets.


And, you know, people are losing their. Fucking eyes, here it is. The military is banned from using tear gas on the battlefield, but police can use it on crowds at home. Here's why. And this is on CNN. Just think about that. The military is fucking banned from using this, but you're using it on civilians that just want to protest the tortured death of a guy who was being detained by a cop who had a 14 year history of being a piece of shit and dozens of I mean, he had more than a dozen complaints of abusive behavior.


And they're going to use tear gas in these people and just shoot rubber bullets randomly at folks.


I don't know what it takes. What is the lowest common denominator?


Like he has to murder someone, like in front of you and people still be like, yeah, yeah.


Or whatever, because he's he's he's on the way out. I think it's it's it's slowly but surely stuff like this. He can't help himself and under pressure when when people are angry at him because of all this. And I think one of it's kind of crazy, but one of the big things that started it off where he really lost his composure was all that shit that he said about Lysol, like maybe get disinfectant and put it in the body, a cleansing when he started doing that.


And then the next day they were asking him about it. I was being sarcastic to see how you reporters would call on it.


Like, No, you weren't. You were ramblin. You were like, I've done that before. I'm rambling. But I would say, the fuck am I talking about? I don't know how you use Lysol in a person. Why am I saying this?


He's pitching. He's pitching as if, like, you're in the writers room and he's like, yeah, he tried this idea, you know, what about you, this character with that character?


But you don't do that as the president in public about health issues.


See, this CDC, some Americans are gargling with bleach or putting it on food to fight covid-19.


Is that real? Really?


I did like a survey of a couple of thousand people and somewhere in the range of like four percent of people admitted to me gargling or brandy or washing stuff with bleach.


Well, this is this is Darwinism. Yeah. This is if you're over 18, go do it another way. But don't say that, Joe.


Don't know if you're younger and you're young and you don't know any better. You just you're not uneducated. But at a certain age, like you should know not to fucking gargle with bleach.


Right. Tide pod challenge all over again.


It's tide pod challenge. But it'll tell you it's interesting, even like I stay off Twitter, all of that stuff, I don't talk.


Thank you. I just it's it's tough out there. I want to delete my Twitter account.


It's so toxic these days. I'm in a tweet thread or a text thread, rather, with a couple of comedians, and they'll send me the most egregious, ridiculous things that are going on on Twitter with people arguing about all kinds of crazy shit. And I'm like, man, this is toxic.


Like you're reading into these this a lot of these people have like severe depression and mental health issues and they're lashing out at people and and they have these like like witch hunts.


And they go after folks for jokes from 14 years ago and attack them and put up screenshots and and they think there's somehow or another, like, doing something positive. And did you do it? Tourist's Twitter scrub of like old tweets deleting.


I did that. I mean, I see every day the actors getting fired and shit. None of my stuff was, like, terrible, but it was just like bad jokes.


Well, the problem is with us in particular, we say the most ridiculous shit to each other all the time.


Yes. And then Twitter was like a lot of it was like trying jokes out. And a lot of it was like you had a hot take on something that was ridiculous and you knew was offensive.


But you're only saying it for fun. Yeah. And then people take those things out of context and they pretend that it's like your real feelings and thoughts like these are jokes. People say ridiculous shit that they don't really mean because they want to get you to laugh.


That's all it is. And if you take those out of context, it can look pretty bad. If I'm like, you're like a pretty pure comedian, you know, I have to kind of, you know, I act and stuff.


And that that was a totally different world. That world sucks because you can't really say anything.


So even when I do stand, like, what the fuck, what am I supposed to like? I can only I've learned my lesson is only telling my stories.


You can't argue with that, right.


Like I'm just telling you stories about my father or like me growing up in Hong Kong, exactly what are going to say. I'm a fucking asshole because I'm telling my because I grew up a certain way like so that's the only thing that I found the land that I as people can't for now.


I can't for now.


But as things get more and more ridiculous, eventually one day they'll be able to get mad at you for that. Like they just once everything's been cleared out and people have been purified, they just move the goalposts.


Yeah. They find something thing that's offensive to say or do. There's things that people are getting fired for today that three months ago you could say easily and people would agree with you. It's just weird to say it to your friends.


Don't tweet about it. I guess is the lesson. Well, the thing is, a lot of people tweeted, you know, fuck in 2008, they tweeted it and then someone will go back and find it 12 years later and you get in trouble and you get fired.


People are getting fired for old tweets, like, I'm really glad I don't have a job job like where someone hires me or fires me, because just as I've said a million things in the podcast, drunk or high or talking shit with comedians, where you just try to make to laugh and say stupid shit.


Yeah. And, you know, and then if you take that out, if you don't see the whole podcast and get the vibe of how we talk. Right. And the conversation, you just make a snippet out of it. You can make someone look like a real piece of shit. But it's it's disingenuous. It's disingenuous. It's deceptive. They know what they're doing. They know that they're trying to paint a very distorted perception of who these people are when they're taking their tweets and taking them out of context and putting them up there and and trying to get them cancelled.


They have rocks. It's just like a looter in a lot of ways. Like they have rocks and there's a window and they want to throw a rock at the window.


You know how the military hires hackers to hack into their own system? Yeah. To see how vulnerable they are. I think there should be a new job out there for comedians, celebrities to hire these Twitter people to see if they can dig up any dirt.


And I'll give them five grand if you can find anything.


Right, just to prevent some sort of tweet storm. Yeah. Against you. That's a good idea, actually. It's actually a good idea for actors like they should do that before.


Well, I know they do do that now when they hire someone for any sort of prominent whether it's you're going to be on the Today show or you going to host some show or you're going to be a sitcom actor, they'll check your fucking tweets.


Now, they want to make sure they're not, especially if you're a comic, right?


They look at us like we're criminals. They look at us like, what do you do? It would have been up.


You would even do when no one's looking at what you been writing on your own, you fucking weirdo. Yeah. Trying to make people laugh, you ridiculous shit. That's why the virtual shows are the worst.


And imagine trying a joke on Zoome. They recorded canceled. You get canceled after zoom virtuoso.


Oh it could happen.


It could happen. Yeah. Yeah. Well you know what's interesting though I think I was talking to my buddies about this if if I think I'm a nice guy, if somehow there was an old tweet somebody found and it's some bullshit and they're trying to cancel me, do you think you or like friends of mine would speak on me?


Hey, man, he's actually a good guy.


I would 100 percent speak up for you 100 percent. Right. So so I think the people that actually got tweets dug up about them, there's two way.


Sometimes you get people speaking. I was like, no, no, no. He's actually a good guy. But most of the time it's like, yeah, he was an asshole.


Yeah. He actually didn't hire no black people because blah, blah. So I think it's a combination of both. That tweet just exposes a little bit of that person and then everybody jumps on and it's like, yeah, no, you know what? He's actually a dick.


It could be or it could be. The person who's getting attacked is does not have a high profile friend. And they're you know, they're kind of like just starting out and maybe they've got a job somewhere and none of their friends have any clout. So they can't really speak up for them. And if they did, they'd get canceled. So they're scared.


They're scared of the mob because it really is a mob man.


When an Internet mob comes after you, you know, it's it's just not a good way to communicate.


You know, there's an interesting guy who had a tweet about this one to pull this up.


There's a gentleman named Whereases Tweet here.


There it is. OK, Alex Levin, Ovid's, I'm sure I'm saying this right, Levin Novick's Alan I'm sorry, Alan Levine. Its trying to read his last name. Can't I glossed over his first name but he had a really interesting point that what we're eating when people get sick, you're eating highly processed food. Right.


You're not eating healthy natural food when you're consuming tweets and you're getting a lot of your information from Twitter and social media, you're getting highly processed information.


And he was saying it's just as bad for you as processed food and then it's unnatural and it doesn't come in a natural form.


And I was like, that's a very excellent point. The way he put his his Twitter handle is Alan ALJ and Levie and overmighty Z. I'm going have him on the podcast. He's an author and a professor. He's just to the point was excellent. Like I've said, I had a similar point that I said to many people, like consuming gossip and bullshit, and you're watching stupid television shows, reality shows in your mental diet is very poor.


But I think the way he formed that is actually even better, that it's really highly processed because the form you're getting tweets right, you're getting 280 characters that form of like data and information. There's no social cues, there's no context, there's no nuance. And you're getting this very weird message and you can decide good or bad, good message. Bad message, bad person. Good person. Yeah, it's hard. It's it's.


And then anger know there's no there's no real way to me it's a bad way to exchange information with other human beings. What's the anonymity of it like.


People wouldn't say that shit to your face. They say they're going to get beat up or just there's a common courtesy when you're talking face to face. I wouldn't say certain things to you when you're in person.


Yeah, but when you're anonymous and then you're angry, that's it's not it's also convene.


You can demonize someone and attack them. And you don't care if you get them fired because they had a weird Halloween picture. They dressed up like an Indian in nineteen eighty eight, you know, you know, I mean like there's a lot of that shit going around. We should all delete our Twitters.


I don't know why people have Twitter anymore. Well it's good for promoting shows when we used to have shows.


Right. Yeah. Yeah. I never my Twitter never caught on because my shit is so vanilla, you know, because I don't ever say controversial shit. And that's how you get followers.


Well, you're smart. Yeah. Well, controversial shit helps. I used to read tweet a lot of cool shit that people sent me that I had to stop listening, reading things that people are sending me.


The one thing I ever really recently tweeted about was I don't even want to mention this, but the whole changeless thing with SNL, I was sitting in my trailer. I was just angry as an Asian person reading this. And then I just said, no, this guy should not be here, blah, blah, you know, like almost I became the mobs, but I was just angry and I never thought about it.


And I got so much flak, you know, even saying something that I thought was right for my experience, what I thought.


And then ever since then, I'll just like, forget it. You know, I'm going to I'm only going to re tweet other people's shit. I have no opinions.


You know, the Shane Gillis thing was very weird because, like, they're talking shit, right?


They're trying to be offensive, to be funny.


And no one was listening. Right. When they were doing it.


And there's like, you know, a thousand people downloading their podcast. They just thought they were just being offensive and saying ridiculous shit because you can and because you make each other laugh. I don't think I don't think he's racist. I don't think he's a bad guy. I think he's just talking shit. It's the casualness.


Yes. I think that was what got to me. It's like, damn, yeah, they're just white people in their rooms talking about us like that. Like, that sucks, you know?


And I think they probably wouldn't talk like that if no one was around. It's weird. It's like you're talking like that because, you know, it's taboo to talk like that. It's part of the fun of doing it.


It's it's not it's I mean, you know, all your racial racist apologist. I'm not I'm not apologizing for it, but I am saying that's what a lot of those kind of guys do. This is like a shock aspect to certain comedy where they try to make each other laugh by saying, shit, you're not supposed to say. And he he had some fucking great sketches. There was a great sketch that he put up that Norm MacDonald retweeted because no one was upset that he got fired for it all.


And it was about people taking things the wrong way and misunderstanding and running with the worst possible scenario. And it just like compounded. It was a really great sketch, but I shouldn't have brought that up.


And now people are going to tweet at me, no, you're fucking an asshole comic. Try to get another comic fired. But yeah, I get it.


You know, look, I get it, man. Especially being a minority in America. I get it being an Asian.


Like I say this in my standup. It's like people coming up. Thanks for representation. I love it. I love it. Yeah. I love represent Asians, but it wasn't a choice.


When you wake up Asian, when you wake up Asian, you can only representations and there's some kind of responsibility.


So I was talking to Steve Aoki about Bruce Lee. Oh no. I'm a giant Bruce Lee fan. We were talking Bruce Lee stories and he was saying that like when he was a kid, it's like Bruce Lee was like finally like Asians had this represented just bad ass representative, you know, it just didn't exist before in popular culture.


Like, that's how unique Bruce Lee is.


If you really stop and think about it, like there was literally no one any even remotely like him in pop culture before him and then burst onto the scene. And then it was like a ton of fake ones.


There was Bruce Lee, you remember do you know Bruce Lee? What? Bruce Lee died.


They had this guy named Bruce Lee dressed like Bruce Lee and do very slim. We're moving to Bruce Lee and Bruce Lee, fans like myself, we like I'll take it, it's like, you know, was he was Asian, though, right?


OK, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, Bruce Lee was huge.


I mean, you can tell his impact 40 years later, he is still one of the most Asian famous Asian sex symbols.


Yeah. And representation. It's extremely important in that sense because I have had girls tell me this is just anecdotal.


He can't hate me for this story. But I mean, it's just a fun story.


But this girl told me she was like a white girl. She was like, you know, when I watched The Crow, which is Brandon Lee's movie, his son, he was like, when I watched a crow, I felt like that was my sexual awakening when I was 15 years old.


And guess what? I sex with her that night. I mean, like, that shit matters, bro.


Like, I swear, I went crazy. Rich Asians came out and everybody was watching it.


People want to want to start fucking Asian dudes. Yeah, that makes sense.


Sadly, I don't know statistically. You know, I think that there's some research on plenty of fish or some Asian dudes. And black women are the least likely to get a match on dating apps.


I don't know. I spy a much bigger systematic conversation because we were, you know, emasculated, blah, blah.


But I think what, Representative, if you had like ten more Bruce, you know, or ten more crazy rich Asians, that really helps.


Just the more representation you or me, I'm just going to blow the fuck up.


I'm doing fine. I'm fine. I need some other brothers to or some some white girl to be watching my stand up and be like, you know, I'm going to go fucking Asian guy.


That's important, man.


That that's my my dream in this business is to help other Asian brothers get laid. I think you can do it.


I hope so. I have faith in you. I might just do that. So you should do that to whatever. You should be the only guy that has a dual career like successful comedian, successful porn star that there's something about.


Right? If you decide to become a porn star, it taints you for everything else.


Comedy, though. Yeah, I think so.


Really? Yeah. I don't think my acting career started slinging Dick now be hilarious. It would be kind of funny, but do you think that it would taint his comedy career at all.


How this dick game now houses did came up. It is pretty fucking strong if a strong day came. I think. I hope you think so. I think maybe maybe somebody has got to be brave enough to do it.


Do you remember when Snoop Dogg was like hosting pornos? He was, yeah.


He was hosting them, yeah. What does that even mean? Like he would be like in the room like oh shit. People are fucking like he is.


He was doing things, he was doing things with porn.


I'm, I'm sure I'm right about this but who wants that doggy style. Yeah.


Yeah. Dogs. Oh so he had like porn that he was like put look Snoop Dog is beyond reproach.


He's so cool he's going away with everything. Yeah. Get away with everything in anything no matter what it is. But that's a bad idea to start with.


I don't even like the dude talking shit when he's like fucking you know, I don't I don't want any noise from the man I like.


I like like this one guy. I think his name is like a black porn star like Wesley Pipes.


I don't know. I mean, maybe I know too much about porn, but he may talk some shit and it's cause I'm like, yo, shut up, doglike. Let me let me just concentrate. Yeah, dude. To be very careful here, but just showing you guys.


Oh yeah. We can't really see this right now but the sun up it's available to find.


And so, so the girls were like doing all their stuff and he's like he's not doing porn but he's like producing it. Right.


He's not in the same room. Right. He's like I don't think so.


That's probably a good advisers like Snoop. Let's keep you in the other room. Yeah.


This is back one like we had the authorized button on the cable boxes, which doesn't really exist anymore. Remember that? No. It's like how you bought paper views. You had to press a button. You go to the channel and then like if you wanted it, you hit authorize and like for three ninety nine you get to watch whatever was on I don't really room.


And that's how this like.


Yeah, that's how I like when cable boxes first came out.


You press it on the box itself on the on the remote control authorized button.


So there's a D.J. there. Easy for kids to buy paper. It's a whole party and then it becomes porn.


Looks like it. I mean, I'm no detective. The girl's got her pants off now. So there you go. Jeez Louise. I think it's like the after parties. After the show.


Yeah. But that oh, there's no we're all dancing and everybody's having a good time, OK? Seen enough, Dutrow? I don't know if I like that like this. I don't know if I like that. You know, it's too casual to fuckin us. Too casual. Right. Right. It's out in a party.


Everyone's out in the open in the middle of like it's seemed like there by a pool. Yeah. Yeah. Kind of a pool party fuck party type of vibe. Yeah.


Hmm. Yeah. Maybe I'll consider point Poincaré but it's weird right.


Because everybody wants to fuck but nobody wants you to fuck on film.


I can take you like if you found out that Scarlett Johansson was having sex you'd like.


Of course she's having sex. She's a beautiful girl. She probably likes men and she has sex. But if you if you said Kalid, Scarlett Johansson wants to have sex on film and you can watch everybody like what's wrong with her.


Yeah.


Yeah. But I mean, look like Sasha, great porn star who became kind of an actress, one of those Soderbergh movies.


How many did she do the girlfriend experience?


I know she did a couple of things. She's an odd case, right? She's very smart. Yeah. She's, I think, a decent actress, but she'll never make it to that next level because she was a porn star.


Now, has anybody done the reverse where they're actor and then became a porn star and then went back to acting? Because you establish yourself as an actor?


I don't think they've ever gone back.


It's one of those Hail Mary last ditch effort things. I think Dustin Diamond after's from scratch. Yeah, I think he say by that pawn. Right. I'm sure. But that was after he hasn't acted. Didn't he stab somebody that he stabbed somebody. Yeah, he did a lot of shit. He did stand up, stab somebody, fuck people did a lot of rich life.


I like how stand up is grouped into that rock bottom.


It is the we're grouped into porn stars and strippers.


I think he did stand up after that porn. I think it's porn. Stand up stabbing people.


I think it was stand up stabbing people porn. But I might be wrong.


We're all just one step away from someone.


What do you know about do you know Vincent Gallo, the actor? Yeah. Yeah, great actor. But ruined his career by getting a real blowjob in a movie that he produced.


Well, that's that, I think. Yes, I think I brought on Bunny. Yeah. Oh, yeah, yeah. I got. That was recent. Well, no, no, it's like more than a decade ago. OK, no, no, no, no. Yeah.


I want to say to early two thousands. I want to say 2004, maybe something like that, that Salani I don't know what story is, but that sounds kind of shady.


And me too. If you're the producer and the star and you're getting a blowjob.


Yeah, for sure. Yeah. You could definitely see that 2003. Yeah. Brown buddy. So it's with I don't know how to say her name. Chloes.


How do you say her name. Silvania. Is that is that is it. I don't know.


She's, she's bounced back but I don't necessarily believe that he has and he's a really interesting like. But what is it. Buffalo 64.


Is that what the name of that movie is. It's really weird. Interesting movie. He did some interesting shit. What does that his Buffalo movie, Buffalo Sixty six. Really interesting movie. He's a great actor, but he decided, I think he was like, you know, he's out there. Right. He's a real artist and probably also a pervert.


And he's like, listen, I don't you just suck my dick for real.


And Chloes like, let's do it. I'm an artist, too.


And so she really sucked his dick. And it was it was pretty hot, but people got very mad.


They got very mad because they went to see the critics were fucking furious because they went to see it. And instead of it being like simulated, it was actual sex. Mm hmm.


It's weird, right? Like, you could simulate violence. Right. Like John Wick movies. I fucking love John. Crazy. Great. But it's hard to plan. Yeah. Brains are splattered. Dudes are getting stabbed. The eyeball. Everybody is fine with it because you know, it's not real. Yeah.


Could you have simulated sex if you know for sure it's a rubber dick and a plastic pussy. Fine. Like show penetration. Fine. It's fake penetration, folks. No need to worry. Nobody felt really good while they were doing this.


This is just rubber on plastic wrap. Yeah, we had a there was a robot the robot was pushing and it's a fake dick and it's all CGI.


Would everybody be cool with that?


Well, you know what's interesting now that he told me I like real sex scenes inside of movie, those movies, Nymphomaniac. What's ADOS name? Van. Something like he's a European guy.


I don't know about those. And that was like those was like real sex scenes and I think real double penetration in those movies.


But it was it was like, I guess like a good considered a really good envelope push and type of movie.


So maybe if you European you can get away with it.


Yeah, they have different standards. I was in Germany and I was flipping through the channels one time and just raw porn was on regular TV.


I was like, oh OK. Just raw porn, just regular porn.


People are fucking it's kind of cool I guess for them. Like you want to watch people. Fuck, here you go. I don't get I don't get the appeal of it because there's pornhub now.


I think what people are trying to do is what I'm saying about violence, like why are we so OK with overt like spectacular violence, but we're not OK with like if you knew like CGI is so good now, it's so good.


You know, you can have monsters that aren't really there. They're all created by a computer. Yeah. Why can't you could you have CGI sex? Would people be OK with that or are we so freaked out by penetration that we don't even want to watch fake penetration and nobody wants to get a boner next to the family in the that it is?


Maybe maybe it's the shame thing like they feel for so distorted.


We don't care if someone gets their brains beaten in. Like one of the scenes on television that made me abandoned. Walking Dead was when that was his name, Negan doesn't he beat Glen to death with a baseball bat, beat him over the head, his fucking eyes hanging out. And I'm like, this is murder porn.


Like, what is this? Why are you making me watch this? This is not fun. I don't want to watch someone get literally splatter like he's beating them over the head. His brain is splattered like like a watermelon. It dropped off the top of a building. It was terrible. Yeah, that's OK.


But you couldn't if you had a scene in that movie where a man went down on a woman who was eating her pussy and you could see him eating her pussy.


People like this is outrageous. This is disgusting. Get it off the TV. She's enjoying it every minute of it. She got her feet up in the air moaning.


He's there, but she's happy.


People would be like, this is a terrible movie. You're a piece of shit. I can't believe you did this.


I think it's a shame you got it. Everybody watches porn and jerks off, but not everybody.


You got to really like 40 or 50 people that don't even touch it. That's tough. Just out there drinking water and running. Yeah, yeah.


I don't I don't trust those people. I used to have my my whole life, my old roommate, we used to watch Game of Thrones together and great show, you know. But there are certain seasons that slower than the other seasons, and I didn't like it because I was like, oh, I wish the storyline would go faster or the character would get developed faster. And my buddy thought he here just like, man, I would stop watching the show.


There hasn't been any fucking in the last four episodes and I didn't understand why he doesn't just go watch PornHub or something like why does he watch Game of Thrones only for fucking.


Yeah, some people are unique. Yeah, it's a different take on things.


But this brown Bonnyman that tanked Vincent Gallo's career, I mean, you don't hear about him anymore.


He was a big star, like he was in a lot of like really interesting movies that were well respected. And it was a big deal. And this one movie 17 years ago, fucking what's he doing now?


He might as well just double down and do porn.


No, I think you went back to doing movies, and I think he just does, you know, kind of obscure arthouse movies. Probably that is the question that people don't really know about that much.


You just don't hear his name. And he's it's a shame because he's a really fucking great actor.


He just had this idea and his logic, it's it's you know, it's trackable.


You get it like I'm going to she's going to actually blow me for real instead of like a scene where a woman like if there was a scene they're making out and the girl goes down, you just see her head and he's like, oh, and we're fine with that. We're fine with that. Yeah.


We don't want to actually see a dick in a woman's mouth, though, even though we know that's what it's supposed to be. Well, but also maybe it's because he produced it or wrote it like that's like me writing a sex scene for myself.


That's gross. Yeah. Like that's me too for sure.


Oh unless your girlfriend was the actress and you guys talked about it and she's cool with it and she wanted to do it. Yeah. I don't know what kind of relationship you had with Chloe a but.


Well but that's the real like did like especially today in the meta era. You can fucking never get away with that unless it was the girls idea, you know, and like so you'd have to get her on video saying it's my idea to suck your dick, I want to do it.


Well, you don't have to like get lawyers involved, have to sign NDAs.


I have to sign consent forms.


I sadly have I don't think I've ever had a sex scene in in anything. I don't think that's an issue. Yeah.


I just feel like, oh, what am I am I not like not a sex symbol? Is that what's bothering you? A little bit. I mean, time to write a movie, bro.


Yeah. Yeah, I've been, I've been I still I still can't I can't write my own sex scene.


Somebody's got to write it for me.


Wasn't that a part of that ridiculously bad movie called The Room Sex Scene. Oh, so gross.


So gross. But the James Franco movie version was.


It was it was quite funny. And it's obviously kind of making fun of this guy. He has some, you know, some redeeming qualities. He's just like a dreamer, you know, good for him.


But it's making fun of the guy. But he doesn't care. He just wants to like he was next to James Franco on stage at the Golden Globes and stuff. He just wants that fame.


Yeah. He just wants attention. Even if he's the even if he's the nail, he doesn't need to be the hammer.


You know what? The most insulting thing I've gotten is recent. I don't even talk about it. But anyways, I should because it's just funny.


You know, I'm I'm finally at this point in my career, if people sends me scripts, if I want to do it, which is very flattering, I'm like, oh, great.


So there's an email. My agent says is like, are you going to be really angry at this or really happy about it?


I was like, oh, fuck. Not a good way to start an email from your agent. And they're like, they want you to play a lead in this biopic. I was like, Oh shit, what's up?


You know, like I'm ready. And then they're like, Yeah, but it's the biopic of William Hung. I was like, Brother, is that the Virginia shooter?


Nah, nah, nah, nah. Oh, that's that guy's American Idol singer. She bangs motherfucker.


Oh, I met that dude. Look, nothing wrong with the guy.


There's definitely something wrong with him. Well, yeah, yeah. But yes, yes, yes. But he's not malicious. No, no, no. Maybe a little aschberg or something.


I don't know what it is, but I thought it was that that one dude who was a shooter I think versity.


Yeah. That's tough to I read all 115 pages of that script.


I've never been so angry reading a script like I wanted to fucking vomit. And why were you angry?


Well, you got to understand, I think William Hung set us back like ten years. Look, nothing wrong with that brother. It's not his fault. Right?


Maybe there is a very nuanced way to write this movie of why American Idol producers picked him out of crowd and featured him just to make fun of him and why the rest of America laughed at this guy. That might be an interesting story, but wasn't that the whole thing about American Idol?


It's like you had real talent, but then you also had delusional people and the delusional people was part of the. Oh, it's funny.


I love watching that, but I think. Just cut so deep as an Asian guy, it's the opposite of William Hung is the exact opposite of Bush and and but he's there's something wrong with him.


I mean, as a human being, like there's something to be like.


I get the guy signed a release and I get that that's part of the fun with the show. But there is kind of a difference between people that are mentally challenged and someone who's just not very talented.


But people are laughing at. Exactly. That's what I'm saying is mentally challenged. Something wrong with them? When I say there's nothing wrong with them, I don't mean he's not, you know, autistic, mentally challenged, whatever it may be. I'm saying there's nothing wrong with his intentions. Right.


He's a dreamer. He want to make it right. Right, right.


So there is a very nuanced way to write about William Hung.


That could work, but we just shouldn't make that movie. Have we ran that of Asian people out there that I can do biopics about?


And fucking William hung a script, lands on my desk.


Well, isn't that that's a part of the problem with reality TV in general? Right. It's like what they're trying to do is there's some reality TV that's based on actual events that are taking place. But a lot of it is like they're taking you have to sign these releases on a lot of these shows that allow them to edit your words in a very distorted way. But you can you and I can have a conversation.


You could have an answer to one question, and they'll put that answer on another question that's totally unrelated. You look like a real piece of shit, right.


And there are 100 percent allowed to do that. Yeah. And they do that for the storyline. They do that for the narrative. They don't care about your reputation. They don't care about what happens when you go back home. People like, how can you fucking say that, Jimi?


Like, I didn't have access to the raw tapes you can't release. You know, no one's going to believe you, but that's they victimize people on purpose just so that they can make what they call a good show. Yeah, but they're doing that with him.


It's different because he's got a problem. It's not like he's a guy. Like, it's not like if I decided I was going to be a singer, I went on American America's Got Talent. I was terrible. Yeah. And I'm singing and everybody just they hit the buzzer to get the fuck out of here. Yeah, I'm I can I'm a normal person. Like, if you think I suck, like, I probably suck. Yeah. But if I have a problem, like a mental problem, like there's something wrong with me.


Yeah. And I do that and you know there's something wrong with me. And you still put me on television. That's where we're getting weird. That's what we're getting like.


Are you you're profiting off taking advantage of someone. Yes. Yeah. Yes.


You're profiting off of someone who's clearly mentally handicapped in some some way, shape or form. If there's a spectrum of mental disability, he's on that spectrum. It's not you. It's not Jamie. It's not me.


It's like, oh, he's a regular guy. Yeah. You know, we're all different, but regular, like, you can talk to them. That guy's off somethings, you know, he's off. Yeah.


But they like perfect Ron. It perfect line them up because people like that they know people love.


And why are people laughing.


You know, I look it's tough being I guess one of few Asian actors in America.


Right. I'm very fortunate to be in that position.


We all kind of know each other. It's a small circle. I'm very proud of all of us.


But early on in my career, I got some flack from Silicon Valley, my character, you know, it was accent of character, which I mean, for me it's a little different because I came to this country, I started I couldn't really speak English, so I was like, okay, I'm just going to play an early version of myself.


I understand. I'm to try to put some human in his character, but then some articles or whatever. It's like this is an offensive stereotype, blah, blah.


And that really looked into that. I was like, OK, I get it. Eventually the character became a more three dimensional character because the jokes no longer on him just being foreign. It's on him being like a diabolical coater person.


But it's tough being an Asian actor because now not only do I have to decide on playing a part and not by looking at, oh, is this a good script? I got to look at the cultural ramifications.


Is this good representation? Because there are so few of us, each of us, that does something mean so much more? Right. That was the beef with the APU character because there wasn't a lot of Indian. And then you can criticize whatever.


Now, that's what's great about this crazy rich Asians.


And then I had a lot of fun on that movie because for one of the first times, I wasn't the only Asian dude on set. And I can just play a character. My character's an asshole in that movie, but I can just lean into that and be a character actor and play it.


And it's a powerful, funny movie, great production. It came out excellent. Everybody enjoyed it and that's good.


And there's a whole spectrum of Asians. It's not just one Asian representing all Asians and handsome Asians, you asshole Asians, the romantic lead and also the bitchy ex-girlfriend or whatever. So we can just actually be actors for the first time and not be actors Asian representative.


So when something like William. Comes to the table. Yeah, I just can't do it, man. I mean, come on, I get it. You know, it's interesting that that it's like when someone gets offended at racial stereotypes, society puts it through this filter of whether or not it's valid. And I'll give you an example.


The Sopranos, the Italian American Anti Defamation League, or whatever the fuck it is, they were pissed at The Sopranos. They're pissed that it was it was reinforcing negative stereotypes about Italians. And I'm Italian and everyone I know that's Italian was like, what the fuck are you talking about?


Those are real people. I know guys like that. Yeah, yeah. This is offensive. That's offensive reality. Yeah. Is the mob real? Are those fat guys real? Do they eat pasta like that. Yes, that's real. Yeah. That's not because Italians aren't really discriminated against so it's it doesn't hold any water.


What also you are Italian.


There's a ton of Italian actors, comedians out there.


So Sopranos is not the only place where you see it. Right. It's not the only presence. So that it down and it's fine.


Yeah. Because white people, you can play whatever mentally handicapped guy, not so smart guy or complete asshole because there's a million other white people.


But as soon as you play a mentally handicapped car, it's over. That's a very dangerous. But that was Robert Downey Jr..


Oh, he was Tropic Thunder retard. Never go for Rita. But then he get an Oscar nomination for being in blackface. I hope he did.


I mean, he we talked about it on the podcast, and he was it was like, thank God we talked about it on the podcast months ago and we didn't talk about it today because today I wouldn't even bring it up.


Today, people are getting the guy who's the fucking editor of Bon Appetit. Yes. They got he got fired for a photograph that he took dressing up like, I guess he's Puerto Rican. Like that was a costume party, dollface or something. Little brown, face it all. Just gold chains and a hat and said the Bronx or something.


Yeah, yeah. It's I think they said it, they called it racially insensitive.


Well, but that was kind of what I was talking about earlier, though. Adam Rapoport, I am a big fan of Bon Appetit until like maybe then and then I got to OK, what's going on here? Because, OK, the news came out with him on that picture, but it's not that picture. And then his staff, there's this girl that was one of the only minorities on camera.


She started saying, yes, I agree, not just that picture, but I'm the only maybe non-white person on camera that's not getting paid fairly.


They just want to push me on camera for diversity.


But I get paid fractions of whatever the other pay. And then even other white people spoke up and be like, yeah, we have some systematic stuff here we should look into.


Oh, at the yeah. At the organization. Yeah. So it's like so it's a combination. Yeah.


So if I have a Puerto Rican picture of me, I don't think people would start jumping on me and be like, yeah, he is kind of a dick.


But here's example. If someone had a picture of them pretending to be Italian, nobody would give a fuck. If he had a tank top on with spaghetti stains on it and his hair greased back, no one would give a fuck.


The problem may be that there's not enough representation in a positive way of Puerto Ricans in the media because like you have a who's like who are the there's a lot of famous Puerto Ricans. Yeah. Like who?


Who are give me examples of I don't want to get the wrong nationality with famous actors, but I'm very aware that there's a lot of famous Puerto Ricans, but maybe not enough maybe because it's maybe so maybe it's the timing of immigration.


Like my grandparents, when they came here, I talked to my grandfather a lot about it. They were horribly abused. There was a lot of racism against Italians when they were initially immigrated in the early nineteen hundreds.


But by the time I was a kid, it was gone. I mean, I experienced a little bit of it in Boston and with Irish kids, it would make fun of me for being Italian or shit on me for being Italian. But by the time I was a grown man, it's still like that. Kind of like a..


Italian racism is non-existent, basically, because it's like just white, kind of it's like covid in Italy right now.


It's you can't even find it like you see the new CDC, they were talking about a covid, like the the the viral load in Italy right now.


So small it's barely registering. Oh, wow.


Really? Yeah. Because they were rough.


They had it rough. Yeah. They're not healthy. Again, these are my people. They fucking EPOs to drink wine. They all smoke cigarettes, they live on top of each other. No one's washing their hands. Yeah. There's no exercise. Try. I was just having this conversation with Sebastian yesterday. We were joking around about this.


He's like try finding a fucking good German and Italian hotel.


And it's totally true. Every time I'd go there, I'd be like some cable machine with some fucked up pulley system that's broken. And I just want to be doing push ups and sit ups and just run up the rocks or something like there's no gyms, like the gym is a joke.


No one over there is working out what the thing is.


I don't think I want to say that. Or I could say that I can't just do a bit about Italians not having gyms and being fat. Right.


But Sebastian Maniscalco. Yeah, no, no, but I can do that. But I'm saying you can do that. But you could do we wouldn't give a fuck.


No one can.


Somebody what you and Sebastian wouldn't but somebody nice people are assholes, whoever. Would it be like those Italian American anti defamation people that got mad at The Sopranos, like, shut up.


There's no anti I mean, the anti Italian sentiment in this country is so small. It's you can't even measure it. It's a it doesn't count. You can't complain. You can't complain where you see what Asian people have to go through. Black people have to go through. Mexican people have to go through. Muslim people have to go. You can't complain if you're Italian. Yeah, you can. It's ridiculous.


Yeah. You know, Lonzo Bolton set this jokingly to me after you know, my seconds.


My said has a lot of Asian stuff, my stories, you know, and some complaints and then he's like, you know, I like how are you talking about race because you got minor inconveniences.


Black people get shot, you know. And I was like, oh shit, shit, I never talk. But he's a friend. He was joking to the point, you know, but that's kind of what you're saying. You know, it's a point.


It's a real good point. But, yeah. Is it weird that we have, like hierarchies of racial discrimination in this country, you know, hierarchies, and then there's there's like positive racial stereotypes, right.


Black guys, big dicks, Asian guys, good at math.


Are those OK? Like, are those stereotypes OK?


Apparently not. I don't think I don't think it is.


I it's I wonder when as a culture will I mean, I really honestly believe this and I'm one of those I'm a forever optimist.


I really believe that this moment, the reason why these people are in the streets, the reason why there's a take away, the looting, just the peaceful protests.


The reason why all this is happening is because. There's a lot of parts of our culture that haven't caught up to the Zygi used to the way people feel about things, the way people are disgusted by racism, the way people are disgusted by discrimination, and then people are united and getting together to try to show that like it's a cultural shift that's represented by this mass movement of human beings.


I think it's I think every if you follow, like Steven Pinker's work, where he talks about violence and if you go back and look at crime 100 hundred years ago versus now, you see this very steady decrease in crime and violence and people getting better.


We're getting better at everything. And I feel like this is a cultural moment where people are going to get better at racism.


Yeah, I hope so. Not better.


And doing it better yet to be sneakier at it. You know, I mean, really about better just we're all humans, man. And the only differences is, you know, that we came from different climates. And to pay attention to that and focus on that above all else, it's just it's so it's it's annoying.


Yeah, it's dumb. It's just it's an artifact of the past, you know.


Yeah.


And I wanted to get to the point where you can make fun of everybody and no one gives a fuck.


Well, yeah, it's just fun. And also you want to like like when I talk to my black friends, I'm not asking them, yo man, tell me about Black Lives Matter.


Educate me or whatever. Like we're past that. Like when I'm talking, I'm talking about girls, you know, like the right life. But I think when you're uncomfortable, that's when you're like, hey yo.


So you're Italian. Like, imagine if that's my conversation. That's weird. Like if you come up to me, I walk in the store and the first thing you ask me is Asian shit like, did you learn to use chopsticks?


Yeah, we're not friends. Like, we're just the you know, you're just I'm your Asian consultant. So I think. Right. Yeah. It's good to get past that point where.


Sure. We can just talk about anything that's beyond that.


But yeah, there is so much work to be done. I think there's it's what's happening is is very it's a great turning point. We look be like, yeah, there's great things happening.


And then there's also the feeding frenzy. The like the the online mob feeding frenzy is happening to this like this whole broad range of things that are happening all at once.


And there's great things and bad things.


But that's just part of being human. Like you have to see the bad things and just go, this is fucking gross. Like, let's get away from this and this is better. And then you see, you know, like when when people see things that give them hope and you see all those little heart signs or people love things and like things and say, this is amazing. And then they share it and reposted and retweeted. It's like that's it's it's spread through people.


We should all be looking for more things that make us feel good, whether it's our own actions or things that we can find online, like more things that like that resonate with how we want the world to be.


Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Absolutely. And. Yeah, I mean, I don't I don't have anything to endlessness and, well, I mean, that makes you feel good.


All those things are good and dick for the ladies and the gay folks, folks and pussy for the ladies that are into ladies.


So the conclusion of that entire conversation index. Good. I should do porn. That's that's what we're saying.


That to you taken away in a subtle way. OK, the past hour and a half hour. Reconsider. I'm going to redo it. Yeah, I could.


Well, you don't you don't know my my my day game. You don't know my dear game.


I've heard your jokes about your dick game, so I'm assuming your dick game's pretty good.


I got to represent bro. I got to do it. I got to do a dick game show, you know, to represent tattoo this shit.


Yeah. Do you feel like comedy has less opportunities for Asian guys. Stand up in itself.


Yeah. Stand up. I think I look at stand up as such a utopia.


I have such a love for it because it's, it's a meritocracy. It is a meritocracy. And the weirder you are, the less fitting in are in society, the better you probably going to be. You have an angle.


And when I first started I was able to do some say improv, improbable, whatever shows that I would never have gotten to do one year in because they were Asian shows.


So I was able to fit something, you know, so.


So that it could be could be. I always say this. I think it's it could be easier if you have an angle, whereas it's a race thing or something, some specialty of yours to get into acting, to get into comedy. But when you get to a certain level it becomes less work I think.


Mm. Interesting. Yeah, like gives you an angle to break in, but once you've broken in, then it might not be.


I've had conversations with my female friends about stand up female friends that are comics about stand up and the ones that are really good all seem to think it's a meritocracy. And the ones that are not very good seem to think there's some discrimination.


Interesting. Yeah. The one you talked to, Ali Wong, Ali Wong and I had a conversation about it and I'm and she goes, Do you think it's a meritocracy? I go, I do.


She I do too. I think it's because, like, look, she's fucking murder in it, right? Killing Caitlyn absolutely smashed. She did like some insane number of sold out shows in San Francisco. She's a beast. She's there's no denying that. Right.


Also a woman. And but there's other women that will tell you, like it's hard for women to get on the lineup's. It's hard for women to get promoted.


I'm like, OK, mate, I think it's harder for women to go on stage. It's harder for first of all, if a woman goes on stage and does stand up almost automatically her politically, her political opinions. Nobody wants to hear. Men don't want to hear your political opinions. Men don't want to hear you telling them things that they don't already know. Men don't want you to like if you talk about sex, like men like you've got to be like a broken, slutty kind of a girl to talk about sex on stage and then they'll go with it.


But if you just like a regular girl with no problems and you want to talk about sex, it's like your you get scrutinized.


I think. So you have to be better. You have to I think, like for a woman to like, write like a Whitney Cummings or allies or someone to, like, rise through the ranks. You have to be undeniable. You have to be able to go into any crowd and slay, you know, and but some women along that process of like figuring out that there's a sort of a narrow window that you can fit your jokes through in the beginning at least, they stumble into that and they bounce off those walls and they don't they don't get like a guy can like right away, talk about politics, talk about sex, talk about anything for men.


It just has to be funny. It's basically wide open. But men discriminate. A lot of men do not want to generalize. A lot of men discriminate.


When they see a woman go on stage, they go, oh, great. A woman comic. Some woman, I don't know. Right, you're going to suck. Are you going to talk about politics? Shut the fuck up. I didn't want it.


Like some men don't want to hear a woman talk. Yeah, that's tough, man.


So I thought about that. Women have to be better.


And I guess.


Do you think it's harmful or is it helpful to start in that narrow lane, whereas it's a girl talking about dirty sex stuff or an Asian comic talking about being Asian and then you can expand to other jokes?


Well, I think we all start with training wheels. Yes. I mean, we all talk about jerking off in our first five minutes.


You have to. Yeah, well, how old were you when you started? Stand up. Twenty one. You me too. Yeah. I didn't know anything. I was a moron. Like, sex was the only thing that I was even interested in. So that's all I talked about on stage. Right. You know, and I don't just surviving.


Yeah. Yeah. Whatever. You can get a laugh. You know how you do it. Yeah.


I think it's harder for women in the beginning. Parts are harder and harder. It's harder to do that. It's harder to just you can't just talk about sex. I think they have to be a little more undeniable. They're a little more scrutinized. And again, a lot of it is like men don't necessarily a lot of men, again, I'm generalizing, don't necessarily want to hear a woman on stage. See, there's a thing about stand, too, like like you're a smooth guy when you're on stage.


I love your delivery, your presentation. Very easy to watch, very casual. But because of that, because you're so comfortable, it gives you the illusion that anyone can do it right.


Because you're just talking right.


I can talk to you. I can go up there and do what he's doing. I know how to talk. He's talking. I can talk.


I'm going to do standup. Yeah. And so it gives it gives so dopey men already think they can do what you do.


And when a woman does it be men that are sexist automatically think they can do better than that woman and they don't want to hear.


Huh. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's an easy it's like acting. It's like acting seems easy just being myself, just talking. They don't know the writing that puts into it like for us comics and then the training for actors.


It's not like we're driving an airplane, you know, or flying an airplane.


But when you get to like Daniel Day Lewis style of acting like pitch, you can't do that. You stop pretending you could do that. You get to like my left foot or some of the crazy shit that he did.


You know, I would say something about acting. There are naturals like Gennevilliers. Never take an acting class.


She's probably crazy as fuck. Who knows? That's what I would say. Yeah. Just really good at at at something. Whatever the skill sending at pretending and lying something. Right. And you just really good a really good at knowing the human condition somehow.


Yeah. But comedians, even if you're a fucking natural you suck in the first five years.


You suck. You suck. I mean, you might get a copy seeing anyone, but just like immediately good, some guys that have gone through Alcoholics Anonymous are really good right off the bat because that's like their stage training.


Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. There's a few that I knew back in Boston who's well, quite a few guys actually in Boston started out in AA. But this guy, Dave Fitzgerald, and I remember he was a grown man when I was a boy. I was like twenty one and he was, you know, late 30s and that's when he was starting stand up. But he was way advanced because he just had this ability because he would do the he was an alcoholic for years.


So he would he had these great fucking stories of all the times he did Coke and drank so much that he didn't remember what he was doing and, you know, got arrested and he would tell these crazy drug fueled stories on stage at an AA meeting and people be dying laughing.


And he had this sort of way of doing it. And then I believe it was I forget who the comic was. It was in the audience. It was also when they grabbed him and said, hey, man, you ever thought about doing standup? You're fucking funny. You could do standup because he was killing at AA meetings.


So then so then when he would go to work, you got to think it's stage time. Yeah. Hi, my name's Dave and he had this like, crazy raspy voice. He had a hard life, Boston accent, hard life.


And it's a funny fucking dude. And he would go on stage at a comedy club the way he would go on stage at an AA meeting and murder. So he was he was he was killing real way before me killing real early on because he had months of standup, maybe even years.


I'm not sure how long he had done the AA meetings before he actually got on stage at a club. But he he had an advantage. Yeah. Yeah. There's still stage time.


Yeah. It's like he's been doing open mikes for five months.


Also super supportive, open mic nights like. Hi, my name's Dave. I'm an alcoholic. Hi, Dave. Yeah. You know, everyone is there with you. Get a little more comfortable, get loose and you're around a bunch of other fellow junkies. You fucked up their lives. Yeah. Yeah. You know what's interesting, like speaking, I like being supportive.


Comics were very like we make fun of each other. That's what we do. Yes. It's like you walk off a stage like the first like if you bomb and you walk on stage, like we're doing a fucking One-Man show.


Yeah. You know, it's just in a way now it's a compliment. If you can do one man show you Kaelyn, but we just break each other's backs. Right. But I remember the first time I took improv classes, I was so uncomfortable because everybody's so supportive.


You know, that subsume, what, a three, four, five, six, seven, eight. Let's do these exercises and shit. And then I was like, oh, my God.


If my buddy Taurel saw me doing this, I would I not. Oh, my God, I would not hear the end of it, you know. But there's something really nice about that. When you get to a certain level in acting or when you get over yourself as a standup, you want to you should be around supportive people.


Yeah. Once you get to a certain level. But then when people bust balls, like if someone gets off stage and has a terrible set and their friend bust their balls, usually they laugh, they like to eat shit.


You ain't played this shit. So you have a drink and there's laughter.


It's like there's there's there's fun to it. It's like they're they're picking up your spirits by making fun of you.


And then you get to laugh at that. And like we all know, it's a process. You trust the process. And one of the things you have a special that's out right now. Yeah. On Amazon is it right now. Right, right. Right, right, right.


You come out. When did it come out? It came out two weeks ago, I think. OK, beautiful.


So when did you film this November. Oh, you got in pretty early.


Yeah. Yeah. It's funny I start my set by saying Asian's. We had a couple of good years. I guess not so true anymore.


You know, after the whole covid they got in right before covid became gigantic news.


Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. It was pretty tough, I mean before or so. So the special came out. What in me. Yeah. Early May and I was, I was kind of kicking myself. I was like shit. If it would have been later my whole material would have changed like blah blah. But it's like good to kind of have that out there.


Yes.


And have people kind of see a glimpse of how good life was maybe six months ago, you know, like you're positive it was because now it would have been a little more somber tone, I think.


Yeah, it's hard now. I mean, it's hard to figure out like what to say. It's going to it's going to take a while for everything to, like, settle in the place where people can accept even what's happened. I mean, how many people you're dealing with in the audience that have lost their job. The only people you're dealing with, you know, there's no job for that doesn't exist anymore. Their business is gone. Yeah. And they just want to laugh and like, maybe there's some wounds that you don't want to scratch that we're going to have to navigate those weird waters.


Yeah, I don't know. Like, when we go back, do we open with talking about covid and quarantine? Because that's what's on everybody's mind that we talk about some totally different.


I think I'm going to not talk about covid.


I might talk about the the the riots fascinate me because it's what I've always said, like people have said to me, like, why do you have. Guns like, why are you in the self-defense, like why, you know, something like civilization is a thin veneer, like we have only been civilized for the last 10000 years or so. Before that, we were fucking barbarians for hundreds of thousands of years. We have that same DNA of those barbarians.


It's in our blood.


And we keep it together with religion and societal norms and and community and love and friendship. But when things go sideways, you get to see what people are really capable of. And that's what we saw during the looting, in the riots, when people have an excuse and a reason, particularly when people are backed into a corner because they couldn't work for three months. And then there's a justification the system is fucked up. This guy that killed that, the cop that killed that guy is a piece of shit.


There's there's riots and then you see cops that are fucking shooting tear gas at people and you're like, fuck you. They just want to smash and loot.


You see that thin layer of what a what a human being really is.


The civilization veneer gets removed and you go, oh, look at the real the real thing under there is an animal. Humans are animals. We're weird talking animal that and we want to survive. And we have ideas of fairness and rules and and and we have a mob mentality. There's a weird thing that will happen that it's probably built into us from thousands of years of surviving hand-to-hand combat in war. When shit goes crazy around, you lock into chaos mode.


And if you've ever been around a mob like that's going crazy and nutty, you can feel it, man.


You feel it in your skin. You feel it in the air.


I'm fascinated by that. And I'm probably going to talk about that.


And you're the most prepared guy. If some shit comes to shit, you can fight. You got you got weapons.


But I'm the be the first to get the fuck out of here, too. I'm the last to stay and fight. I'm like, get the fuck out of here. You can't win this. Yeah. This is not a winnable situation. This is not a home invasion. This is this is the world going sideways. Like you've got to get the fuck out.


How does it feel to be a martial arts expert, somebody that can fight? Like, do you feel more confident going outside to you?


Like, you know, because I'm always looking around like, OK, make sure that guy doesn't fuck me up. He can even totally kill me, like, you know, whatever.


People can always shoot you. They can always shoot you, stab you, they can always hit you over the head. You're not looking. There's always danger in being a person, especially when you're around bad people. Right. But if I'm in a situation where some guy's a dick.


And, you know, I think like I've seen people get beat up, man, that couldn't defend themselves and it's horrible to watch. It's sad. I mean, we've seen many videos online of people just getting beat up by somebody. Yeah. Because they don't know how to fight. And you see, some person really doesn't even know how to fight and they're beating the fuck out of someone and hurting them really bad.


Yeah, that's not going to happen to me. Huh. I like that.


I like that of some asshole tries to do that to me. I can I can hurt them. I can detain them. I can I could submit them. Yeah. But it doesn't ever get to that point.


Have you have you gotten in fights lately. I'm not a fighter. I mean I know how to do it, but I'm a nice person.


So it's just knowing that having a self-confidence feels powerful, then it stops.


Yeah, but there's a lot of sketchy people out there, man. We've all seen videos and I watched a video yesterday of some guy punching some girl in the face for like no reason and knocking her unconscious.


I'm like, what the fuck? People are assholes.


There's a bunch of people that are abused and they come from horrible backgrounds. They're abused by their parents or their family.


And they're they're a mess.


And they they walk amongst us free until they commit crimes and they get locked in jail.


So if somebody wants to fight me what I do, I just run. I get the fuck out of that, bro.


You got to see it coming. Seeing it coming is real. That's a real important part of it. Like seeing it coming right away, seeing sketchy people, knowing you got to have that Spidey sense. You're going to get the fuck out of there. But it's exciting to be around danger.


That's for you, not me.


It's exciting to be in weird areas and be around weird people.


It's like when things are a little bit a little sketchy, a little seedy. People enjoy that is like a it's like what do you what would you rather have?


Would you rather have everything be fucking boring and vanilla and just write everything is Hermosa Beach or you know, every now and then you want something to be just a little bit fucking dirty.


It makes you feel alive when you do the shitty mike. So like random spots here and there, there's a grittiness to it.


Yeah, I think especially standups, we really gravitate to that.


Yeah. I think feels like we like a little danger. Yeah. We also like what you're doing when you're doing standup as you kind of exposing these truths that everybody kind of knows about but doesn't talk about.


And it frees them in a way like. Yes, yes.


Like there's like there's thoughts that are there there.


But you got to unearth them. You got to dust them off and show them to people and like, yes, yeah, this is a danger to that. Right. There's a riskiness to what we do.


Yeah.


For sure. There's something it's a weird job, man, and everybody does a different right. You get the Hedberg. He does it. Mitch does did it one way. You do it a different way. Joey Diaz does it a different way. Everyone's got a different way of doing it. But it's ultimately you're trying to find those points, find that those perspectives find use those comedy weapons to pop through on these people and break into their mind and get those sparks flying.


What do you think separates a good comic to like the next level? Great comic? There's a lot of things.


I think it's really dependent upon the person, but I think a lot of it is focusing on comedy and like really working on your shit and making sure you're you're you're a real objective about what you're doing.


Also, a lot of reps, man. Yeah. Putting in a lot of reps. Reps are giant man.


Yeah, I think that's there's no no denying that. And then also different things that you do.


One of the things that I do is I, I do stand up. I listen to that stand up and then I write, I write on stage, I listen to my sets, I write off stage and I mean, I write on stage. And like, I've come up with ideas of free ball. You take chances on stage. But then I sit down and I write right. I sit down in front of a computer for hours. Wow.


And every now and then I'll sit down maybe for four hours and I'll come up with like one line. But it's worth but that's one line I would have never gotten. Yeah. Some of those lines, like the best lines in my act, came from me just sitting in front of a computer.


Yeah. Just writing.


Just it's it's a constantly I guess the the danger and the fear fearlessness of comics is also the willingness to try new shit.


Yeah. Four pages. No shit that maybe only one line works because I know many people that I came up with that much funnier than me naturally I think.


But they, they are stuck in that fifteen you know, they keep going at fifteen because they feel good.


That's their drug. That's, that's the fifteen minutes to get to go away from their wife and have fun. Yeah. So they won't want to risk that and have a shitty night.


Right. They want to kill you. Love that feeling of killing. Yeah. And that's what I was getting out earlier. Like one of the things about like you just did a special one of the exciting things about comedy is we all become beginners. After we do a special, you do a special and then you start from scratch. You're a beginner again.


So like I know you're a great comic. I know you're. Really funny, but if I see you and you're eating shit, I'm going to laugh at you because I know you're good, I'm like, dude, this new shit's rough. Yeah, and we all would be laughing. We'd be like, oh, ha ha. It'd be fun. We could laugh together at pain. I'm still insecure.


I'm still insecure in a way that. OK, sure. I got to go write some new shit now. And the hit in a weird point.


Now I can't come up with new shit because we can't go to comedy clubs. Oh.


So I'm kind of stuck. We're all going to be beginners, all of us.


But I'm still afraid that even though I don't need another acting job from somebody watching me and standup, I don't need to impress a manager in the audience or another. There's still an insecurity like I don't want to tank in case somebody I like is watching me for the first time.


Yeah. I mean, but that's where alcohol comes in. Yeah. Shot of Jack, hit of a joint and just fuck and let the good times roll.


Well I guess you can't think about it because imagine that time you just walked by and saw me in the lap for the first time and I just had a dick, you know, like I won't be like everybody dick in the club.


Yeah, that's true. But like, he's eating a dick just like I have. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I don't know if that ever goes away.


I know what you mean, but the there's like the thought process of like well you should work out your shit at the ha ha or the White House or flappers a little bit off the beaten path.


You don't want to do it at the Improv. You don't want to do at the store. I disagree.


I disagree. You have to. You have to. You have to be taking chances. You have to swing.


I'd takechi flopped at the store a bunch of times or pull out a joke that I have like roughly in my head. But it's also preparation's important to like you got to, I think, even want to have a new bit. Like I just sometimes I'll go up with a just a seed sometimes and like, no, I need like a plant that I could like just dig a hole and shove that in there.


I need a full plant. Yeah. I mean, yeah, but it's really dependent upon the subject matter. Like I remember when the Harvey Weinstein shit broke, I had a bit that night. I'm like right away. I'm like, oh I know my angle. My angle is that if Harvey Weinstein did that to my daughter, I would I found out that I was sexist because if Harvey Weinstein did that to my daughter, I would fucking kill him.


But if Harvey Weinstein came to my son with a solid contract, I'd be like, Dude, you're going to be Batman.


Right, right, right, right, right.


You know, and I had this whole bit that blossomed that night, like that line, dude, you're going to be Batman. That came the first night on stage because it was like right when he was getting arrested. I was like, wow. And I was like, how would I feel if that was a woman that was like this disgusting woman that was like Harvey Weinstein in a dress that was trying to fuck my son.


I'd be like, oh, yeah, yeah. Come on. Do you think working in a coal mine is fun? You got to do what you got to do to get by in this world. Yeah, come on, pussy.


And in that that bit became a bit like it blossomed on stage.


I just had a seed. I just had an idea.


The best feeling that's like you freestyle.


It's amazing because it was like hours after he was arrested. It was like hours after it went down. Yeah. And it just it just it just popped. And then it became a bit that I wrote and I worked on it and I you know, I honed it on stage.


But LDAP it was just that was was just a seed. But then there's other bits that, like, they took a lot of real thinking and like this is like these are mine field terrain.


Yeah. Yeah. I'm going through here.


I got to make sure, I make sure that I really got all my I's and cross all my T's when I'm talking about this, because this is a controversial subject. I want I don't want anybody to misconstrue what I'm saying here.


Right, right, right, right, right. Yeah. That's also the tough part, the message that you're sending, because that's beyond just being funny. Oh, yes. You got to be responsible at that point. And yeah, it's really hard.


Yeah.


You want to like, say if you're doing a joke and some in the joke, you reference gay people you want like if there's a gay couple in the audience, you want those folks to know you love them.


Like I don't have any zero animosity to anybody.


Like I love gay people. I love straight, I love everybody.


But I'm going to make fun of you. Yeah, I'm going to make fun of something that I that something that gay people do. But I want you to know there's got to be a way that I want you to know before I do this.


This is not homophobic. Yeah. Yeah. If I'm saying this, I'm saying this just because it's funny, we're all funny. So I have to figure out a way to navigate those waters.


Do you. I guess what I try to do now, especially with the landscape of the standup comedy specials, I see someone, the one that really pop and I like it, where a lot of it, like Hassan Monogamists or Hannah Gatsby's not.


Funny in that sense, Hannah gasps say right, like a lot of comics. It like a TED talk. Yeah, but I think there's a point that I think that's cool that actually gets a message across. So I always try to her thing is probably like maybe 50 percent tech talk and 50 percent comedy.


If that I try to do like 80 percent comedy and then maybe 20 percent. I'm just telling a story that's a bit, you know, like I have a story where I almost got deported a couple of times, you know, when I was being an idiot.


It's not it's not that funny.


But there was some kind of a point to it. Right.


But you're like a pure comic. You're like a hundred percent standup like that one man show stuff.


Because I was I've trouble to see, like, am I am I kind of being a sellout here by doing that?


You know, no, I don't think it's been a sellout. Look, people obviously like Hannah Gatsby. Look, I had this conversation with comics about it. Like I thought it was weird when they were trying to say that she's redefining comedy or uncommon in comedy like.


No, no, you're not. No, you're not. This is what you're doing. You're doing your thing. You're things like people are enjoying. It's resonating. It's huge. Yeah.


So her thing people are enjoying it doesn't invalidate ignore it or invalidate Donelle Williams, Donau Rollins or or Harland Williams.


I was going to say or you know, who's like totally silly. You know, Harlan Williams is just completely silly or is just wild and loud and that's great too.


Or, you know, good, good thing. Joey Diaz, it's like it's not invalidating Joey Diaz saying validating people that also do a different thing that people love as well. It's just you're doing something where you're talking about you're like Hannah Gadsby's talking about her own pain, right? She's talking about her own issues. She's talking about her own life. And it resonates because it's honest and it's real. It doesn't have to be funny. The people that enjoy it, maybe they don't want to just see up.


They want to see something. They want to see something interesting. Mm hmm. But if you go see Daniel Wrong's, he's just going wild. He's having fun. Yeah, that's comedy. Yeah, it's wild comedy. That's OK too. Yeah. All things are ok al madrigal's ok. Everything's OK. It's like different genres of movie.


Right. But people will get weird you know. Do they get hateful, angry. Like you know I only like blues music. This rock and roll bullshit.


That's really what it's like. That is, that is what it is. Like I've said I've heard people say that about Harlan Williams is one reason why I brought up Harlan.


It's like he's so silly. And if you saw Harlan on paper, you'd be like, what is that? Hey there, butternut flapjack. Peachy pie. Yeah, man, you would have done it set. I would not work. I would eat shit. Yeah.


Every time I'd quit comedy like that. Yeah. But Harlan there is something about his delivery and that's what he really thinks is funny and it's like you can't tell me it's not funny. I watch him kill. Oh he's amazing. Amazing. Yeah. Right. So like that's his way. And then you know, you've got John Mulaney that's he's got a different way. It's also very good. Yeah. And then you've got Anthony Jeselnik, who's just mean with great writing.


Right.


But it's also very good. It's his way. Yeah. There's a bunch of different ways to do this thing. And for one person to decide, like, oh, Hannah Gadsby's real comedy Comedy's Dead, she just killed comedy like, you don't know, comedy and you should just shut the fuck up. Right. Because what you're saying is nonsense. That's like saying rap music killed Beethoven. It's what you're saying is dumb.


Mm hmm. Yeah. Yeah, that's great.


That's that's how fucking comedy or whatever it is. Yeah. Mean it's comedy too. It's not comedy, you know, it's it's comedy until you decide to tell a story that's not funny. But it's also interesting. Yeah.


Even within standup itself, there's so many different genres.


There's no wrong. I love that.


Yeah. One hundred percent. Yeah. I mean one of the things I always loved about Hedberg is that like it's so absurd and that's not my style of comedy, but it's so silly and absurd.


Steven Wright, same thing. Yeah. Non sequitur after non sequitur. Bizarre. Weird.


I used to work at a fire hydrant factory, couldn't park anywhere near the place like that kind of comedy.


Now, I would never write a joke like that, but with him, with his bizarre look and his bizarre style murders, you know, I didn't know about standup comedy when I was growing up.


Never heard of it really, because I grew up in Hong Kong. We didn't understand what you saw.


Bet comic view. Wow. When I was thirteen one who was I think it was Jay Anthony Brown that year of Bruce Bruce around then.


It was so interesting to me because this wasn't even an art form that existed in my childhood in Hong Kong. I'm sure there were some stand ups.


You never heard of it, never heard of it. Never heard it. And I came to America and I was trying to learn English just by watching TV. And then it seems like just completely different genres in this new art form. It's like I heard music for the first time and I was like, holy shit, this rock and roll music.


And there's, you know.


Hip hop, so, so interesting, because I remember I really gravitated towards Comic View that was so interesting because it wasn't just jokes or me trying to learn English, it was me also trying to like learning about culture, how each race saw each other, blah, blah, even though there were stereotypes, you know, that they're joking about.


But it was cool.


Whereas I watch a Comedy Central premium blend didn't really laugh.


I don't know what I like. So I always gravitated towards one urban comedy, you know, and and.


Well, they're having more fun. Yeah, exactly.


But because I was watching the performance of it, it's like there's hip hop fans that like a song because of a beat. And then there's hip hop fans that don't care about the beat and only listen to the lyrics.


I was more like the beat guy, you know, and I just love that sort of performance.


And then only later on when I got into comedy, I was like, oh, wow, everyone that's doing that premium blend stuff, maybe not my cup of tea, but it made me laugh like as an adult because I understood how hard that was.


Mm hmm. Yeah, I found out about comedy from my parents, took me to see Richard Pryor live at the Sunset Strip when I was 15.


Mm. In the movie theater, watching Richard Pryor on stage going, oh, this is crazy. I couldn't believe how funny was a guy had seen all these funny movies. But to watch this guy just talking on stage, I was fascinated. He's one of those guys.


When you watch you like I can do that because he's just talking. He just did he write this? But there's so much insane talent like Michael Jordan makes basketball look easy.


But I mean, I guess sort of, you know, you can't you can't dunk. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.


There's there's so many different ways you can get introduced to comedy. It's it's I love hearing, like, when people like when the seed get planted in people's heads, like when did you know that you were going to try to do this.


People asked me that question and I hear like great stories like the Richard Pryor story. Like it's like me and my brother. He's a snake in a movie theater. Watch Eddie Murphy live after you had heart attack.


I promise I'll be a comedian like, really, you know, amazing. I don't have that.


I was I think it was a desperation that made me want to do comedy desperation.


I never thought that was even a thing. Right. Like because you don't go in the arts when you're Asian, that's not a real job, you know.


So is it because your family would discourage it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And also, nobody in my family did it in the arts, like anybody that made money was in finance, whatever real jobs, quote unquote, you know.


So I, I was just I was about to graduate college with an economics degree and I hated the internship I had in finance and shit.


And I just saw my life flash in front of me. I'm like, oh my God, for the next 40 years I'm behind this desk, fucking mutual funds, who cares? You know? So I just tried.


I like a quarter life crisis, right? When I was about to graduate, I was like, I got to do something to meet new friends, to meet girls, to whatever.


So then I took jujitsu classes for like two months.


Horrible. I was I was the smallest guy and the weakest guy in the class now teaming up with the girls. And they would twist me up like a pretzel is very discouraging. I quit after like two months if that. And then I tried like different things, like boxing classes, gyms, whatever, you know. And then. I say the story, I wrote this book and I say in the book, like typing in local open mikes in your Google search, it's one step away from typing in what's the best way to kill myself.


It is that desperation that you need, that I need it. So then I just Google.


OK, open mikes wanted a ha ha paid five dollars. You have to pay five dollars for five minutes to stage something haha.


So five other comics can not laugh at you.


It was, you know, horrific, but that still felt better than me sitting at home making no friends because I saw a camaraderie.


I was like if I'm good I can make some friends like here in the open mike and there's a new world out.


There's an out for me so soon after I think I quit that finance internship, very promising internship and I just try to do standup.


You know, I did everything. I worked at Door I at the Comedy Palace in San Diego, this Greek restaurant. I'll turn into a comedy club at night. I work the door, folded envelopes, did everything. If they let me sleep that I would have slept, answer the phones and everything.


I just dove into it not just for the love of comedy in the arts, but for the love of this new life. This is a new fraternity that I found.


Oh, you know, that's awesome. So. So a lot of it it was an improvement on my life that was that interested me in stand up and through stand up.


I got laid for the first time, you know, I mean, so like it worked out for me and I kind of had a crisis where, OK, I'm doing fine.


You know, I've a lot of friends now. I have you know, I go on dates like it's fine, like my life is fine.


And I started making money on Silicon Valley, you know, so I stopped doing standup.


I was like, I don't really need this, you know, but but then after, like, I wasn't getting the press either.


So it was a really good feeling because it wasn't a crutch.


It wasn't an addiction I need to feed. And then eventually I did stand up. Finally, I think for the love of it, I was like, you know what, I do miss this.


I'm going to go do it on my own terms, not just because I'm trying to make friends and trying to pull girls. I'm doing it because I enjoy the process of it. So let's fucking do it. And that's the recent, I guess, resurgence of energy.


How much time did you take off to from stand up out on and off like a year or two?


When I had a couple of seasons in Silicon Valley, I would do stand up maybe at Max, I would just go down to Comedy Magic Club once every two months just so I can, you know, talk to some friends or something.


Just wasn't into it dusted off and.


Yeah, but it was stuck in that same old material, wasn't feeling it.


And the reason for the special really was I kind of got pissed.


I was because everybody that was coming up to me in the streets, like in Silicon Valley, whatever, and there's some YouTube clips, people watching me doing things like, oh, I didn't know this motherfucker can do stand up, you know?


And I'm like, man, I am a stand up. I start as a stand up. I think I'm a better standard than I am an actor, you know.


So let me prove to the world I'm not just like a Vine guy or actor trying to do stand up. I am an actor who used to be a stand up and that is my fucking forte.


That's awesome. I had a similar thing when I was on Newsradio. I kind of stopped writing for a while, like a couple of years.


I was just doing the same old material, just phone in and then. Yeah, yeah.


Because when you make a money you don't like, it's hard. You got to find a new motivation and then have some people come to see me and bomb.


One night at the Commodore and I woke up, I was like, I got to go back to work. I haven't slept, I'm just doing the same old shit.


I knew the material was stale. Yeah, it was flat. Didn't have any connection to it.


I was just saying it because I was using it like a tool, like a screwdriver, you know, wasn't there was no like people understand the feel what's going on in your head when you're talking about things and if you're not totally tuned in to what you're saying, they don't want to hear it.


Yes. Yes.


It's it's I think stand ups can all be great actors and we all have to be a base for that because one of the magic tricks and stand up is you told that joke a thousand times, but you got to make it sound like it's the first time.


Yeah.


And if you just mailing it in and just telling it as if you're reading a script in your head, it's like watching bad acting on TV.


If the guy ain't feeling it, you're not going to be feeling it. Yeah. Yeah.


I always describe it as mass hypnosis, that it's like there's a vibe that you're you're putting it out.


You're you're you're hitting a frequency. And the audience, if the words are well worked, if you you have a good economy of words, the things you're saying resonate. It all makes sense. You have confidence, you focus. All these things are correct. Your delivery is comfortable. It makes people feel good. They just let you think like, go, Jimmy, think for me.


I want to hear what you have to say. And they don't they're not judging, they're just like letting you take them for a ride and it's kind of like when someone's really Killorn when you watch someone on stage killing your eyes are open, your jaws will be like you just going along with it. You're going along with whatever they're saying.


You know, it's, you know, Owen Smith, Owen Smith's Killorn. Like, I think the way he's thinking, like I'm allowing him to lead my mind.


You can't wait till you hear his next stop. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.


You're not, like, going out to this or he's. Well, I'm bored with what he's saying. No, no. You're letting if someone's got a well crafted act. But that's the thing is like creating that act like boy, you're gonna have some weird hiccups when you put it together, when you got new shit and it's clunky and it's awkward and yeah.


Maybe go down a road that you don't want to go down. You're like, I got to get out of this bit. You don't know how.


And one bad new joke in an hour said, like, if you just have one bad new joke 20 minutes in, you need the next ten minutes to prove your worth again.


Yeah. Because they're like, oh, this guy. I don't know. Yes. Yeah.


And you got to be real careful if you want to open up with a new joke who they say never do that.


I mean, I don't say I don't agree with that. I don't think there's any never do that. Right. Right. There's any never do. Other than you know, I mean, there's definitely a few never do that. But but if you got an idea and you know it's fire. Yeah. You know, it's going to crack you like just let me just run this on stage.


I know I got a real bit I can do if this doesn't work. Yeah. I have a nice Segway into a real bed. Right, right, right.


In case this takes I'm just going to cut it in half and then go into my old bit.


But when some shit just happened like three hours ago and you go on stage, there's a certain energy to that to which the audience is like this one guy has no idea if this is any good.


Like, you just you have a hot take on something that just happened a few hours ago. There's energy to that. Yes, yes. Yes.


And some some things that, you know, it's an old joke that you've done, say, for two years. And you're like, man, this is what happened.


Yeah, he lost the eye, is it not? And then you try to force some energy into it. Still, it's not there.


It's because to you it's fresh and maybe there is an amazing actor or you can put some acting skill into that to pretend, but it's still not there.


You have to really be interested in what you're saying. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You can't fake that. No, it's comedy. It's a weird thing going on that's not defined between us and the audience. It's very weird. Yeah.


And sometimes even you think you're saying it with energy and with that same rigor. You watch yourself on TV like, nah, I'm just going through the motions and reading lines, you know, ahead.


Yeah. Yeah. Same thing with acting. You don't want to do too many takes.


Oh yeah. You know when you really tell when you're high, if you go to the movies when you're high, go this guy's phoning it in. Yeah. You could see it. There's like sometimes you go to the movies and you're high and it's just like seamless. You just go on this little journey. You believe every word. Yeah. Every now and then someone will pop out like glue.


This motherfucker acting. Yes. Yes.


I never forget. I went to see the Hulk with Eric Bana. Remember that guy? He was way many hawks. There's this one clunky scene.


Maybe they did it too many times or whatever, but is acting because I was barbecued. I mean, I'm in the audience watching this. And I was like, this is so acting like I'll never forget in that moment.


I'm like, this guy's act is fake.


So there's the space for show that I just did. How is that? Great. I'm on Netflix, right? It's Netflix. It's Steve Carell, John Malkovich, Greg Daniels.


I mean, that's a great fucking fucking great dream come true.


Yeah. And it's interesting because sometimes if you're kind of unprepared, you go do a scene and you don't have your lines memorized.


Somehow you pull it off because it's fresh. It's as if you're saying the line.


But sometimes when you rehearse, I'm really just one scene in this one episode.


I don't think I don't think other people would know, like people aren't actors like but I watch it myself because I remember the day when I was doing that scene. I was like, oh, I'm killing it. I'm riffing. I'm like, you know, me and the girl I'm tiny that I'm doing the scene with, which just going back and forth, it's feels good.


It's like a little boxing match.


But then when I watched, I was like, damn, seems a little rehearsed because I think I rehearsed in my mind.


I know she's going to say this. I'm going to say this.


Even though it felt good, it felt like a flowed it lost a little bit of that natural saying for the first time.


And that was tough for me to watch that myself. And I don't want to say which scene it is because I don't think people could tell. But I could. And it kind of kills me. That makes sense.


Like, you know. Well, also, like, you know what you're going to say. There's no surprise when someone is watching the scene. There's all this surprise to it because like they're kind of like it's like watching a magic trick. It's like, where's his hands? I don't even know what he did. Yeah, I know you're talking and they don't have any idea where you're going and they just follow along, you know. Everything you're going to say before you say it, so you watch, yeah, the weirdness and I know what she's going to say when you know everything, I mean, a really great actor who's supposed to know everything, everything.


And then you use your skills to pretend you've heard it for the first time.


Right. Which is a stand up also.


And and sometimes you forget that you just like. Yeah, feels good. But it's not it's practice. It looks like practice.


Did your family give you a hard time about wanting to do stand up, Dad.


There's quite the story there. It's a feel good story. Let me preface with that. So, yeah, my dad was in finance. He hooked me up with that finance job. And when I was like, I don't know, I just don't want to do this. What do you have?


Another job was like, no, I'm going to give the stand up thing a try. And this was like a year or two. And obviously I wasn't making any money. So he was very disappointed. He was hoping it was just a phase. You know, he doesn't even know, as Dana was old Chinese guy, he just like a talk show like you just keeps calling a talk show still till today, a talk show just never got it.


So I was finishing my last year school in San Diego. I got just random jobs. I worked at a used car lot during a day. I worked at that comedy palace collecting tickets and trade for like stage time in the evening.


After that, I'll go put another shift as a deejay at a strip club. Just so I was like trying different things, you know, and I didn't want to lock myself into something. And then eventually the acting started to do a little better.


You know, my first job was two broke girls at two lines, you know, and I was so proud. I was so proud of myself. I was finally making some money. I call my dad.


I was like that, you know, why don't you, you know, watch CBS tonight, you know, I'm going to be on there and stuff.


He's like, I don't I don't have to be CBS as I hope that doesn't fucking have CBS. It's a stickups ten phone back.


Your TV gets CBS. So he was just really knocked down. Right. And then eventually when I got on Silicon Valley, the old man understands what a contract is, a serious regular job on HBO.


He's acting. He got it. So he was finally happy. I was financially secure.


So instead of ever giving it up and say like, hey, Jimmy, good job, I'm proud of you, maybe I was wrong.


Good for you. You know what he said? He was like, oh, it's so easy. You can do it. I can probably do it. And he started becoming an actor.


I was like I was like, OK, Dad, you know what? If you think it's so easy, dude, I was like that. If you think it's so easy.


I was it was a very small agency at the time. I'm like, you know, I'm going to, you know, sign you up with her, see if she needs an older Asian guy because she does not a lot of older Asian guys out there competing.


So she signed him. And then I was like, good, good, good. Now, are you going to go to auditions and understand how fucking hard my life is? How are the rejections? I face all the nerves I got to deal with. But then the plan completely backfired because he went to those auditions and killed it.


He booked like his first six out of ten jobs, which is like an unheard of ratio, you know. I mean, yeah, like you'd be lucky to book like five percent of jobs, but he was killing it like non-union gigs.


He even got on this show. I talk about this a little bit. My standup, he even he even got on the show. That shot in San Francisco is a Chinese show. We thought it was no big deal. Low budget Chinese show became the biggest show in China, became like the fucking modern family of China.


And then my aunt from Shanghai would call the house like, Richard, you're such a good actor. You son must have taken after you. I was like, what the fuck am I?


Right. But now I've accepted it.


That's who we are. Yes, I'm happy that me and my dad's in the same business in a way that's crazy.


And it's a fun story to tell people. Right.


So I was jokingly saying that story to John Malkovich, best sports on, you know, space for us. Everybody gets a kick out of this little story. Episode nine and Space for us comes around. We're doing a table read and it's a China versus America thing in this episode. And they needed a couple older Chinese scientists that are authentic Mandarin speaking Chinese people.


After the table with Greg Daniels, the showrunner, he's like, you know, just I don't know. It's always the same guys, you know, just whatever. And John Malkovich was the one that said, what about Jimmy's dad? Have you thought about Jimmy's dad? And I didn't have thick enough skin to volunteer my dad.


And and then that night I went home. I cut together an acting real for my dad and I sent it to Greg. All I said was like, Greg, maybe give the old man a chance.


He's got a good look.


I think he fits this older scientists in China just let me come in and audition. But I guess Greg was so impressed with the tape, he just hired him.


Wow. Episode nine of Space Force. My dad is in it. He he's great.


He comes in no fear and is seen as toe to toe with John Malkovich. Wow. And how long has he been acting?


I mean. Two years, if not years, never taken, no classes, so crazy. Yeah, wow, I practiced with them on Skype, you know, for that scene, you know, because I was like that. Don't make me look bad.


Don't fuck this up. Make sure you remember your lines. Right. And then he he was he was practicing. And he's like, can you screen grab me, record me so I can see my own performance, you know?


And actors were all very self-conscious. I hate to watch myself.


So I recorded him. I sent him that tape and then he looked at it.


He was just like, wow, I'm really good. Look at me like I'm like listening to I'm good at this.


I was like, go, go for it.


But it's that blind sense of confidence and also the fact that he never thought to be an actor. So there's no fear.


Yeah, I was nervous as hell. My first day with John Malkovich and Steve Carell, my dad came in with just chillin.


That's so funny. Yeah. It's funny that it totally backfired. Yeah. But now, now it's fine. It's a fun father and son story. That's a great story.


It's so funny that he saw you doing it. Like I can do that, you know, he could do it. He's a talented guy.


You know, he he wants to do standup now. Really. He was like, oh, he's seventy something. Seventy two, three. Wow.


And he was like, well Jimmy you think I can do some standup. I was like, sure, just go sign up for an open mic at the Laugh Factory. I'll put your name in the hat.


How about that. It was like, oh no, no, no, no, no, no, I'm not doing open mikes. Can I do some theater or something?


I was like that. No, that's theater. Yeah. He was like, no, I'm not doing for five people. I need to do it. If I do it, I need like five hundred people.


Oh my God. I was like that. That's not how it works.


But who knows, maybe when he does it in front of five hundred people he fucking kills.


What if your dad gets a fucking Netflix special next year? What if your dad just starts murder and puts together some whole routine?


You imagine how crazy that would be if your dad's just a murderer. Just up on stage, crushing punch line, bang, bang, bang.


I want to say I would be happy for him, but there's probably a part of me that's like the guys just.


But how could it not be? He's always been the funny one in the family, though.


He's always a ball buster and everything really kind of came naturally to him.


Yeah. Wow. There he is. Yeah. I don't know if you can find that space forseen episode nine, but completely fearless. Very natural.


Has he written stand up? Does he have any ideas of stuff he would talk about?


You know what, I should have him right now set to see what the materials would be.


Yeah. Hmm hmm. I don't know. I that I got offended the acting stuff because I because I always felt like I snuck into acting. I wasn't trained at Juilliard or whatever.


Right. So that was so it's kind of a similar path.


He snuck into acting, I snuck into acting, whatever. But the stand up thing kind of offended me.


You know, I'm like, I fucking put in ten years, dude, you can't just go do a goddamn theater.


What if he does he I mean, maybe he can open for me one day or my next special.


That would be fun. If you have him open. It would be interesting because that's a rough spot anyway, even for a regular comic going to warm everybody up for a few minutes before they start rolling.


Yeah, but if I introduce them as like my dad, that would help. And people heard the story on the show. Right. Or my stand up, then people would love it.


But you've seen you've seen like a minor or like a YouTube or trying to stand up the five minutes.


A crowd is crazy because they love this person and they're laughing. But then it's hard to keep that momentum going if you don't have the goods.


That's what they say about famous people doing standup in particular. Like you get a couple of minutes where they're happy to see you. And then, after all, like, oh, this guy's fucking terrible.


That happened to me when I first transitioned from just unknown. Stand up to the guy from Silicon Valley.


Do you still remember the first couple of minutes were, like, so hot I couldn't follow my own hype, kind of, you know, and it's interesting because my character on Silicon Alley, he's like he has an accent. He's an immigrant, you know, like we were talking about earlier.


So a lot of people for a while coming up to me in the streets when I didn't know I was a stand up, they didn't know I acted beyond that show.


They were like, oh, ying yang from that show. I was like, Yeah, yeah, sure. Thanks for watching.


And then they're just like, oh, shit, I don't know. You speak English in real life.


So imagine the stand up crowd seeing that they have to get over that first day like, oh shit, this this motherfucker speak English. So that takes two minutes out of all. And then and then they start to accept me as a as a standup.


Do you address that right away? I say this yes.


In my special sometimes. And people laugh because it's true that that's what they think when they see me or when they saw me. It was years ago, you know. Yeah, yeah.


No, it would be really hilarious if your dad became a killer comic. I should train them. Fuck, yeah, I should. Help them write bits we thought about doing like not a reality show, but like a little adventure show me and my dad and I take them to try to find an agent, go to auditions and like, bring them to the Comedy Store to get advice from you guys. So so you can be a comic. Maybe I should I should go ahead with that.


I don't know.


Tony Hinche, Cliff's mom, went on stage and killed Tony when he wrote bits for and he taught her how to do it. And she fuckin murdered really murdered his mom's.


Hilarious, just natural. No state there. She's you know, she's a woman who's had a long life and she's experienced a lot of shit. And and Tony wrote stuff for her and everybody was happy to see her and she went up there and fucking killed. What do you think she did, Jamie? About four minutes. Five minutes.


That's a lot for the first time, dude, she fuckin killed. Really. I mean, she fucking killed. I mean, killed. Like, I was laughing, like, by I think tomorrow was with me on the stage. I think he he was I think it was dumb. He was laughing and we were all laughing hard, like she was like Tony wrote the bits which helped a lot.


Obviously he's a great writer. She was delivering them like a killer.


I, I would not write for my dad. I want them to eat shit a couple.


You you have to get somebody to respect your craft, man.


Right. Because he doesn't respect acting. Yeah. You know, not that he doesn't respect. He just thinks it's a little easy.


He's a genius, you know. I don't know, I don't know if it's a lack of respect for the arts or is it overconfident in his own ability.


But is it overconfident if he pulled it off and so much about acting? Is it is confidence? Yeah. Not being shaken for yourself. It's the correct amount of confidence. It is a correct.


He's so relaxed.


I have a video I got to find on my phone and show you. So it's in the hallway between setups. Me and Malkovich is running lines and I'm nervous and Malkovich works hard.


Like at his level. He still works hard.


He's amazing. We're running lights, you know, in between. Takes the camera pans, pans a bunch of empty chairs and pans to my dad and an actor fell asleep, just dead asleep.


So relaxed.


Shilan is about to work with John Malkovich. That's hilarious.


No nerves. Wow. Yeah. Does he know who John Malkovich is? He does, absolutely. Wow.


And he still didn't give a fuck? No. I think maybe it comes with age. You know, when you're seventy something, you kind of you've seen so much.


He is such a fanboy.


Like he loves taking selfies with people. It's rare.


At first it started off with just like crazy rich Asians like Patriots Day, this movie that they were Wahlberg, you know, in the premiere.


I'll take them to the premiere, my parents, and just to kind of finally get their approval, you know, and he gets it. He gives it up. He was like very emotional.


You don't have to crazy rich Asians and all that.


But his his goal is not to celebrate with a son there.


His goal is to get selfies and the after party, you know, the Chinese Grauman Theatre premieres, you know, at the Chinese theater.


There he is right there, Mark Wahlberg. And he just keep doing selfies and and like I was sitting on a table and and maquettes this table and his boys and his security.


And then my dad just leaned over to me and was like, hey, you think you think we can go get a picture of Mark?


I was like, I don't I don't I don't want to I don't want to ask him because I have fought so hard to not ask for pictures with people I work with. I want a picture of Mark. I want a picture Malkovich. But at the same time, I want to just be a colleague.


I don't want to be a fan, of course. But then my dad forces me to do that. He's just got school.


I was used to that, though. He probably just exactly if I asked. I think it's still kind of lame, but if it's like, hey, Mark, my parents are big fans, can they get a picture and they just shoot old Chinese people?


So that was everybody kind of gets a kick out of him.


He played my dad. And Patriot's Day really is a very small scene. It's a that's an interesting that's how he got his SAG card. That's hilarious.


Talk about nepotism in Hollywood. Oh, that is nepotism. That's how it works. Well, but you know what?


I was actively trying to improve that movie because the movie was very serious.


It's about the Boston Marathon bombing. And I was playing a based on real life Chinese person, you know, very detailed stuff.


Like he speaks with a Chinese accent, but it's a Sichuan Chinese accent when he mixes his Ls and Ts, I forget I forget what it was, but I studied it for a long time.


It's not just a generic Chinese accent. Right.


And then his parents, of course, speaks the Sichuan dialect, or at least just a very proper Mandarin. And the actor they first hired to play my dad it just escape scene. Very simple. That actor they first hired to play my dad spoke Mandarin with a Cantonese accent.


So I went up to Pittsburgh to. Right, to ask Petmin, I, I got to say something. The whole point of this movie is honoring these heroes and be authentic. And this guy you guys might not be able to tell. I know.


And the Chinese audience will know this guy's from Hong Kong or from Guangdong or something. He's not from Sichuan or mainland China, you know.


So I say, yeah, sure, we'll find another guy.


And I was like, yeah, I'll sit in with you, have some auditions and stuff if you want. I was like, Yeah, sure. You know what? We're shooting in Boston might take a long time. I was like, Pete, why don't you just hire my dad?


And that was it. They hire my dad. That's hilarious. Yeah, no, that's hilarious. But it's it's for the art. It's for the authenticity.


Dude, I'm not so secretly hoping your dad kills of the best story.


I want to have you back on after your dad was just murdered a few times on stage. And you're like, what the fuck?


Oh, my God. If he if he comes on this podcast and he'll be a huge star, I don't know if I get a handle on that, because right now it's very much like I'm hooking him up.


I'm still the star, you know, he's just my dad. But what if I'm starting a known as Richard son?


Like acting that will be now we kind of rough. That's going to be hard that he's going to have to really do something special to pull that off. Well, we'll see. We'll see. Maybe he have his own hand Gadsby special.


I mean, and just only talk shit about me in the special that we funny of, like you and Tony or whoever, a bunch of great writers and great comedians start plotting against me for his success, you know.


Right for me. Oh my God. What strategies for how to how to kill. Oh, my God. He loves it. Man. That's great though. That's so cool.


It's a good father and son bonding.


What did your dad used to do for a living? What was his.


He was always like a really successful salesman. He had his own medical device company that he sold in salesman.


Yes. That's a thing where you have to have personality and you have to know how to read a room. Yeah, like we were talking about Alcoholics Anonymous is like a good gateway into comedy.


I think maybe salesmen might be, too.


And then when he came to America, he became a financial advisor.


So that's people to people. You got to give presentations. So he was always a great public speaker.


And I think I took after him. I never really had much stage fright so that he's a natural.


And you say bust balls. So he's always joking around. He's the funny one in the family team.


Oh, my God.


Yeah, I think he's going to kill Richard. Yeah. Yeah, I hope he does. I really do. Yeah. Well, you got to hope he does.


Maybe he would do a two man show for Netflix.


So the odds of him being better than you are very slim. Just be honest. But don't you just want him to do well, want to be good?


Do I really do? I think it's really a joke about the jealousy. I really don't care. He's an old man.


Let him live his bucket list back with John Malkovich. You know, I mean, like, I'm I'm just being good son. Trying to hook my dad up now. Oh, man.


I can't wait to see how this plays out. When is he going to do stand up? Do you have a timeline? Was he going to try it when clubs get back open again?


Well, I think once I told him he can't just do theaters, he kind of became disinterested.


He doesn't want to do open mics. But you got to or maybe dozen got to me.


I mean, it depends on how how much of a perspective he has, if he has, like, real takes on things that he could just go on stage with.


Yeah, you never know, man.


Well, here's the thing. If he goes on stage without the context of this is Jimmy's dad and he just an old man doing a set. I don't know. That's that's a long road.


But if I bring him up and he's my dad, I think people just kind of eat it up, give him a little more slack maybe.


But that might help you accept the fact that he kills. What if he goes on stage without any recognition of you whatsoever? He is just someone introduces him, he goes on stage and just fucking murders that behind to take.


That would be hard.


Yeah, because if you bring him up and you give him a little training wheels and you push him, you give a little boost, really go.


It's exactly what I was saying. How you can't immediately be good and stand up. You need to put in that five, ten years. But if he's just good.


Yeah, I would question myself, like I would be like, well fuck.


I must please tell me when he's going to do it please. OK, we're going to tell me when he's going to do it and I want to go.


I want to go. What. Don't encourage him. I don't want just people showing up. I want to please do it in town.


Please do it now. But if I was an older guy though I'd be really worried about covid.


Yeah.


So like it's going to be a while before he's probably willing to go to a comedy club or something, right. Yeah.


And yeah. Yeah. Speaking of that, I mean I try to see him. Every week, so I'm like very careful. You know, I was I don't want to kill them, you know, but yeah, we'll see. Maybe he'll do one of those virtual zoom rooms.


I don't have to do that. Let's set them up the wrong way.


Yeah, you know what? I should I should completely let go of my ego and right from what should I not do that? Should I see how good he is with that?


You got to see how good he is first.


Let him do it first. Yeah. Don't want him. Just let him do it. Has he been to a live performance by you?


Yes. How many shows the scene live?


I think only one or two. Because he's disinterested in stand up. It's not it's not his thing. He gets movies, he gets TV, he doesn't get stand up. And one time I was doing a Bright Girls Club in Vegas, MGM. I was like, all Chinese people understand Vegas. I'm going to hook them up with a nice room. I was, I think, opening on middling.


It is years ago I was like finally a see me MGM because they know that's a nice place going to a comedy club. I crushed it that night. I could set and you know, afterwards, you and the headliner and everyone's out there shaking hands, meeting people. My parents walked out.


Right. My mom's all smiles. She's very just positive, you know, General.


And then my dad walked out and then my my buddy Jack was next to me. He was the middle. I was the opener. Yeah. My buddy Jack Cohen, older comic, he he went up to my dad. He was like, oh, my God.


Hey, Richard, aren't you so proud of you, son? He's so good. Right? And then my dad just looked at me in front of the entire audience of everyone else shaking.


And he's like, no, Jimmy's not funny.


Oh. Yeah, wow, yeah, and I don't know if he was years later, he said.


That was a joke because because it's not he said this, he said it's not funny if I tell you you're funny, but it's funny if I tell you it's not funny.


There's a story there. I was like, yeah, but yeah.


You're my dad, though. I mean, come on. Like, you're not you're not my buddy at an open mic. Yeah.


And then he also said he was like, well, I honestly didn't think it was funny because I don't get the references. I don't get culturally like what you're saying about whatever. I didn't get it. So he's kind of just being honest also.


So he's trying to be funny in his own way while being honest about his own take on it.


I don't.


Yeah, yeah. He's honest, but he's also still being the ball breaker, right?


He's a funny guy, but sometimes it's hard to be his son if he's using me at the expense of, you know, comedy.


Is it like the style comedy, like insult comedy. You say ball ball breaking like what kind.


Yeah, that's what he does. Yes. Like older Chinese Don Rickles.


Yes. Yes.


That's what Chinese people I think in general I say this my standup and it's funny if I do it in front of a white audience or a non Chinese audience, what does that really happen?


Like I do this bit about how Chinese people would tell you exactly what the fuck is wrong with your face, like Thanksgiving. You know, my mom would tell my girl cousin like, oh, Christina, you got so fat just straight.


I was like, Mom, you can't say that. And then and then my mom and my dad would be like, oh, if we're not telling her who would? And like also being like a comedian. I mean, not not being I mean, being fat cause I'm going to say, oh, being Chinese, being fat or gaining weight is prosperous. It's good, it's auspicious or whatever.


I want to do this. She's a girl. You can't fucking say that.


You know, Christina is not fat and she's this beautiful young woman, you know, and yeah, it's hard to grow up with a high self-esteem in an Asian household, you know, but there is a weird honesty to it.


I don't know. I don't buy it. They say it's honest.


I think it's me pass down trauma that their parents did that to them and now they're doing it. Yeah, I don't know.


Well, there's something about work ethic in Asian households. When I was young, one of my good friends with this kid, his name was Zhongxue Jong Chang, and he went on to be national taekwondo champion while while he was in his medical residency. Yeah, I always used to compare myself to him if I ever thought I had discipline or worked hard. I compare myself to that guy. I was like, I'm a lazy fuck. This guy was he worked so hard, but he was telling me that this is just how it was with his family.


Nothing you ever did is good enough. Like he's Korean.


And he was like, my parents are so ruthless. It's like everything had to be better. Nothing was ever good. It didn't matter if you had straight A's, you could do better. You can always do better. You never, never good enough.


It's interesting, I think that that is more like the very stereotypical Asian parents, the helicopter tiger parents or whatever.


Tiger Tiger mom, I think is a real term.


Mine is, I guess, a little nuanced, like they would give it up for academic and they always call me smart and stuff, but they will make fun of me.


Like I remember after orchestra practice in high school, once my dad came very proud of me playing the violin and like, oh, you're great, you know? So that stuff, they'll give it up, you know.


But then a girl, this really cute white girl came and talk to me after Tracey with her name that I kind of had a crush on.


She just came and talked to me. She was like, oh, my God, you're so good.


Hey, hey, I'll talk to you later. Gave me a hug and everything.


And I was such a nerd, I didn't get any action. And then and then I just looked at my dad. I was hoping he'll be proud, you know? And then he looked at me like you and her. Yeah. Wow. Yeah.


So certain things like he goes a little too far making fun of you. That's a confidence crusher from Pops. Yeah.


But I mean, once again, it could be because he grew up, he never got no girls like that.


So he's like a I like why with my son you know.


Do you think he's competing with you a little bit there and that way? I hate to think about that, but I think there's got to be a part of that. That's got to be a part of why you wanted to get into acting. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Hmm.


Maybe that's one of the reasons why so confident because he shits on you and if you can do it, it's a fucking I can do it. Yeah. Yeah.


It's a weird like he he picks and chooses what he gives it up and not.


Oh so it's manipulative a little bit so you never know. It's like a. Yeah, yeah. Stockholm syndrome, well, you know, I call them out once, and I was like that, why don't you what why don't you, first of all, tell me any dating advice?


And also, why did you never think I could like Daku Girls or whatever like that took me years to overcome.


And he was like, sure.


But like I always said, you were smart. Right. But you just give me like a nonanswer of like he's like. But I always said you were smart. That's what it's what's important to me. Hmm, yeah, so it's sort of like he's excusing the fact that he. Dismissed your ability to I think whatever he wasn't good at, he projected on me like I was as small as I was.


I was a pretty good athlete. I could run pretty fast. I can jump pretty high. I used to play basketball even though I was like the underdog, but I was athletic, you know. But my dad, like when I was trying out for the high school basketball team and that was like, no, you can't do that.


You're flat footed just like me.


You can't come on. Oh, that's so that's the opposite of what some weird, like theater parents do or our coach parents do. The thing that happens when kids get into athletics with their parents failed at sports and then they get really invested in their kid being awesome.


Yes, yes. I'm not sure which way is healthier or both of them less healthy.


Yeah, they're both gross. Yeah.


Yeah. Yeah, there's something really weird about like it's a burden, too, for the kids, like I've seen it with kids were the overbearing parents who just want the kid to succeed so.


Well, because it's like, that's my boy out there kicking ass. That's my boy. Look how fast you were very selfish.


I really care about the kid being happy or not.


And it also fucks with the kids head it a lot of times it ruins their love of whatever the sport is. Mm hmm. Yeah. Yeah.


I don't know. I guess. Me, you know, it's fine, it's fine, I'm fine, I'm fine. You're just fine, Dad, I'm fine. I've seen enough therapy.


I'm I'm fine. It's fine. It's fine. He's flawed. We're all flawed. Yeah.


Yeah, no worries. It's like the scene in Good Will Hunting. Like, I'm afraid you're going to be like Robin Williams. You, me. Like it's not your fault. Yeah, it's not your fault. And I just start bawling.


This whole thing is like parents that do weird shit to you. There's there's some benefit to it. Like my parents were not supportive about anything I've ever done ever. And my parents split up and I was really young. So my whole life was like, I'll show you. Oh, show you. Yeah, I don't get any attention. Watch, watch what I can do. Right.


So that was it led me to get really good at things. That's yeah. That was why I got really good at everything because I never got any attention. So my thought was like I know how to get attention, be better than everybody else and everything. Yeah.


Whatever I do, I just have to be just fucking fully immersed in it. So I became obsessed with getting really good at things. If I had like really supportive parents that were really there for me all the time, like. You know, but that's you that's your personality to take that kind of negative thing and turn into something awesome, a lot of kids maybe in that same situation would have been like, oh, fuck, nobody cares.


Yeah. Yeah. Well, I got really lucky that I found martial arts, like, really. And when I found it, I realized, like, oh, I am good at this. Like, I found a thing that makes me feel like I'm not a loser. Yeah.


I just felt like we moved around a lot.


Like we moved from like I lived in New Jersey till I was seven and then San Francisco from seven to 11 and then Florida from 11 to 13 and then Boston from and it was like, fuck man. I never had like long, steady friends. I was always the new kid. I was always small people, always fucking with me. And then when I got into martial arts, it was the first time I didn't feel like a loser. I was like once like a year or two in when I started getting really good, I was like, this is something I'm good at.


I'm like, really good at this. I got praise from my instructor. I got praise from other students. I was winning tournaments and I was like, I am something I can file. And so I just threw myself into it. Like I was just there was my whole life and I was thinking, like, maybe I wouldn't have been that good if I was just loved exhorting my mom to love me and my stepdad didn't love me.


It's just they're fucking busy, man. And they just they they also grew up in a fucked up life, too, like their their parents weren't supportive either. So it's sort of like that that cycle just sort of repeats itself with kids.


You know, I thought that back in the day about certain things like acting. I'm like if I didn't have low self-esteem growing up about this or if my dad never thought I could be in the arts, maybe I'll never made it here like I made it here for a reason right now.


And my therapist set this one thing not to get like to like fufu or whatever. Here, set this one thing that really resonated with me.


He was like, have you ever thought about you made it not because of it, but despite of it. Mm. So that was, that was kind of nice to hear.


Yeah. Yeah. There's both those things right.


It's like whatever it is that shapes your personality, those negatives, like there's an ebb and flow to all things and sometimes those negatives gives you this gust of energy to go in the opposite direction. And the motivation that you have is sometimes more important than anything else.


Sometimes the motivator, like the willingness to go through a lot of shitty things to make it like sometimes that doesn't exactly have a good friend.


He's a really nice guy, but his mom was too nice to him when he was young. Like she gave him too much love and she always said he was amazing and everything. And he just like he like he even admits it.


Talking about it is like I think my mom was just too fucking nice to me.


Like it's had no drive. It's like he's always loved, he's always cared for and always he never felt scared.


He never felt alone. He never felt like there's nobody out here helping me. I've got to go do this on my own.


And I remember that was like my overwhelming feeling. My whole life was like, no one's looking out for me. I got to look out for myself. This this is the world's dangerous, you know.


Mm mm. Yeah. But it's like. It's all in like I mean, that's a stupid old expression, life gives you lemons, you make lemonade, it's like whatever it is that was negative about it, it can become a positive. It can become like a reinforcing thing. Yeah, yeah. Every bad set is actually the most helpful thing.


Yes. Yeah. Dude, every time I bombed, like I talked about that one time when friends came to see me at the Comedy Store and I realized, OK, I'm phoning it in, I'm fucking up, that I needed that to happen. Yeah, I needed it to happen.


Yeah. Even even with acting or standup, it's like sometimes I'm like, OK, I'm trying really hard for this film because I'm proving myself and sometimes you.


Kose do you like. Oh wait, I coasted on that movie and people still was like oh he was good. I like whatever I was. You keep coasting, coasting and at some point you get caught.


Yeah. Oh fuck. I got to step it up again. Yeah. I mean we need lessons. No one's perfect, right. We need lessons. Lessons come and strange forms. Sometimes you don't ask for them, sometimes you get dealt a hand that you didn't want to get dealt. But it turns out to be the best thing that could ever happen to you.


Mm hmm. Absolutely. Jimmy, you're a bad motherfucker.


Great. Great to have you here. Sit down, talk to you, tell everybody what your specials called so they can go get it right now.


Yeah, my special it's called Good Deal on Amazon Prime Video.


And of course, then there's space for us on Netflix so you can watch both beautiful and your Twitter handle and Instagram and all that jazz.


While might delete my Twitter now, but our Instagram, Instagram and ticktock, I'm a tick tock. Tick tock.


Well, I don't know, but it's at funny Asian dude. OK, yeah. Thanks brother. I appreciate you being here by everybody. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you to for stigmatic makers of the delicious and nutritious lion's mane coffee and they're going to hook you up with a sweet deal just for Jarry listeners save up to 40 percent off on their lion's mane coffee bundles. To claim this offer you must go to for stigmatic dotcom slash Rogan.


His offers only for Jarry listeners. It's not available on the regular website. Go to f o u r side GMAT. I see for stigmatic dotcom rogen and get yourself some awesome and delicious lion's mane coffee. Full discount applied at checkout were also brought to you by Flavor and their friends at Whistle. Pig Whisky Flavor is an awesome club that sends you highly allocated bottles that you won't find anywhere else. And if you love good liquor or you know someone who does treat them with this amazing club membership, visit flavor dotcom slash Rogen and use a special Jaabari offer to perhaps surprise your dad with a bottle of whistle pig piggyback ride for Father's Day.


I'm telling you, get them this club membership. It'll be tough for other people to top that gift. Head to Flavor Dotcom Rogen and use the j. R e offer were also brought to you by Blue Apron. They make cooking at home easy with delicious, spectacular meals. You don't have to sacrifice flavor. You don't have to settle for boring meals. With Blue Apron. You can enjoy top rated recipes all month long. Check out this week's menu and get thirty dollars off across your first two deliveries when you visit Blue Apron Dotcom Slash Rogen that's blue apron dotcom Rogan Blue Apron, Feed Your Soul and we're also brought to you by CBD M.D..


I take this stuff every day. I use their muscle creams, I use their CBD recover. That is my favorite shit by far. I love their tinctures and they're going to make it easier for you to add this to your life. They're going to offer Jarry listeners twenty five percent off your next purchase when you use the code Rogan at checkout. So once again, that CBD M.D. Dotcom used the promo code. Rogan and save twenty five percent off your next purchase of their superior CBD products.


CBD, MD Dotcom Promo Code Rogan. Thank you friends for tuning in to the show. I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did. Jimmy Yank's Cool Motherfucker. Always good. Isn't it nice to find out about new comedians. I love it. I love it. And I love you guys. I'm happy.


I hope you're happy. I hope you're healthy.


Much love to you all. Bye bye.